SUBMITTED TO: EVALUATION OF THE IMPLEMENTATION OF TANZANIA DEVELOPMENT VISION (TDV) 2025 Economic and Social Research Foundation | Page LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS AfCFTA African Continental Free Trade Area AGC Attorney General’s Chambers AGOA African Growth and Opportunity Act APRM African Peer Review Mechanism AU African Union BEST Basic Education Statistics for Tanzania BEST Business Environment Strengthening for Tanzania BOT Bank of Tanzania BRN Big Results Now BRRIBE Blueprint for Regulatory Reforms to Improve the Business Environment CAG Controller and Auditor General CBOs Community Based Organizations CC City Council CC Climate Change CCM Chama Cha Mapinduzi CDG Composite Development Goals CHRAGG Commission for Human Rights and Good Governance COVID-19 Corona Virus Disease 2019 CPIA Country Policy and Institutional Assessment CSCs Client Service Charters CSEE Certificate of Secondary Education Examination CSO Civil Society Organization CSRs Corporate Social Responsibilities DC District Commissioner DCC Drug Control Commission DCEA Drug Control and Enforcement Authority DHS Demographic and Health Surveys DPs Development Partners DRC Democratic Republic of Congo DSA Debt Sustainability Analysis DSE Tanzania Stock Exchange EAAACA East African Association of Anti-Corruption Authorities EAC East Africa Community EBA Everything But Arms EFD Electronic Fiscal Devise e-GA The e-Government Agency ERM Enterprise Resources Management Suite ERP Economic Recovery Program ES Ethics Secretariat ESAF Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility ESAP Economic and Social Action Program ESRF Economic and Social Research Foundation EWURA Energy and Water Utilities Regulatory Authority vii | Page FBOs Faith-Based Organizations FDC Fork Development Colleges FDI Foreign Direct Investment FGD Focus Group Discussions FIU Financial Intelligence Unit FSRP Financial Sector Reform Program FSSR Food Self-Sufficiency Ratio FY Fiscal Year FYDP Five-Year Development Plan GATT General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade GDP Gross Domestic Product GePG Government Electronic Payment System GER Gross Enrolment Ratio GEWE Gender Equality and Women Empowerment GIMIS GPSA Integrated Management Information System GMO Genetically Modified Organism GMS Government Mailing System GOT Government of Tanzania HBS Household Budget Survey HDI Human Development Index HIPC Heavily Indebted Poor Countries IAACA International Association of Anti-Corruption Authorities ICT Information and Communications Technology IFMIS Integrated Financial Management Information System IMF International Monetary Fund IMR Infant Mortality Rate IPC Integrated Food Security Phase Classification IPTL Independent Power Tanzania Limited IVF In Vitro Fertilization JNHPP Julius Nyerere Hydro Power Project KII Key Informant Interviews KPIs Key Performance Indicators kWh Kilo Watt Hour LATRA Land Transport Regulatory Authority LGA Local Government Authority LGRP Local Government Reform Program LHRC Legal and Human Rights Centre LMICs Lower Middle-Income Countries LRC Law Reform Commission LSRP Legal Sector Reform Program M&E Monitoring and Evaluation MAIR MKUKUTA Annual Implementation Report MAJIIS Maji Information System MC Municipal Council MCT Media Council of Tanzania MDAs Ministries, Departments and Agencies MEL Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning MICs Middle Income Countries MKUKUTA Mpango wa Kukuza Uchumi na Kupunguza Umaskini viii | Page MKURABITA Mkakati wa Kurasimisha Rasilimali na Biashara za Wanyonge1 MKUZA Mkakati wa Kukuza Uchumi na Kupunguza Umasikini Zanzibar MMR Maternal Mortality Rate MoA Ministry of Agriculture MoEST Ministry of Education, Science and Technology MoFP Ministry of Finance and Planning MoW Ministry of Water MTEF Medium Term Expenditure Framework MUVU Mfumo wa Usimamizi wa Vyama vya Ushirika MW MegaWatt NACSAP National Anti-Corruption Strategy and Action Plan NAO National Audit Office NAOT National Audit Office of Tanzania NEC National Electoral Commission NEEC National Economic Empowerment Council NEPAD New Partnership for Africa's Development NER Net Enrolment Rate NESP National Economic Survival Program NGACS National Governance and Anti-Corruption Survey NHC National Housing Corporation NHIF National Health Insurance Fund NICTBB National ICT Broadband Backbone NIDA National Identification Authority NIRC National Irrigation Commission NPC National Planning Commission NSAs Non-State Actors NSGPR National Strategy for Growth and Poverty Reduction NSGRP National Strategy for Growth and Reduction of Poverty NSSF National Social Security Fund NWIF National Water Investment Fund OECD Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development OGP Open Government Partnerships OPEC Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries PCCA Prevention and Combating of Corruption Act PCCB Prevention and Combating of Corruption Bureau PFMRP Public Finance Management Reform Program PHDR Poverty and Human Development Report PO-GGRD President’s Office- Good Governance and Reforms Directorate PO-PC President Office-Planning Commission PO-PSM&GG President’s Office-Public Service Management and Good Governance PO-RALG President’s Office-Regional Administration and Local Government POS Point of Sale System PPP Public Private Partnership PPRA Public Procurement Regulatory Authority PSLE Primary School Leaving Examination PSM&GG Public Service Management and Good Governance PSRP Public Service Reform Program 1 Property and Business Formalization Program for Tanzania. ix | Page PTA Preferential Trade Agreement PTR Pupil Teacher Ratio PwD Persons With Disability R&D Research and Development RGZ Revolutionary Government of Zanzibar RITA Registration, Insolvency and Trusteeship Agency RSs Regional Secretariats RUWASA Rural and Urban Water and Sanitation Agency SADC Southern Africa Development Community SAP Structural Adjustment Program SDG Sustainable Development Goals SEZs Special Economic Zones SGR Standard Gauge Railway SMEs Small and Medium Enterprises SSA Sub-Saharan Africa SUA Sokoine University of Agriculture TANePS Tanzania National e-Procurement System TARURA Tanzania Rural and Urban Roads Agency TASAF Tanzania Social Action Fund TAZARA Tanzania Zambia Railway Authority TBA Tanzania Building Agency TBS Tanzania Bureau of Standards TCAA Tanzania Civil Aviation Authority TDHS Tanzania Demographic and Health Survey TDV Tanzania Development Vision TeSWS Tanzania Electronic Single Window System TGFA Tanzania Government Flight Agencytg TI Transparency International TMDA Tanzania Medicines and Devices Authority TMTP Tanzania Mini-Tiger Plan TPA Tanzania Ports Authority TPSF Tanzania Private Sector Foundation TRA Tanzania Revenue Authority TRC Tanzania Railway Corporation TRL Tanzania Railways Corporation TTCL Tanzania Telecommunication Company Limited U5-MR Under-Five Mortality Rate UN United Nations UNCAC United Nations Convention Against Corruption UNESCO United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization UNICEF United Nations Children’s Fund URT United Republic of Tanzania US United States VETA Vocational Education and Training Authority VoC Views of Children WEE Women Economic Empowerment WHC Watumishi Housing Company WHO World Health Organization WOIs Watchdog and Oversight Institutions WSDP Water Sector Development Programme WTO ZAWA ZSGRP World Trade Organziation Zanzibar Water Authorities Zanzibar Strategy for Growth and Reduction of Poverty x | Page xi | Page EXTENDED EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ABOUT TANZANIA DEVELOPMENT VISION 2025 The country adopted the Tanzania Development Vision 2025 (TDV2025) in 2000, which set the tone on the main aspirations of Tanzanians to be achieved by 2025, defined under five main desirable attributes, namely: (a) development that is people-centered, based on sustainable and shared growth and free from abject poverty. Development must mean that the creation of wealth and its distribution in the society is equitable and embracing forms of social and political relations which enhance empowerment and effective democratic and widespread participation of all social groups; (b) living in a country wherein peace, stability, and unity prevail; (c) good governance; (d) a well-educated and learning society whose people are ingrained with a developmental mindset and competitive spirit driven by education and knowledge needed for mobilizing domestic resources for assuring the provision of people's basic needs and for attaining competitiveness in the regional and global economy; and (e) a strong, diversified, resilient and competitive economy which can effectively cope with the challenges of development and readily adapt to the changing market and technological conditions in the regional and global economy. These attributes were ultimately grouped into three main goals of TDV2025, namely: Goal 1: To improve the livelihoods of Tanzanians to be comparable to citizens in middle income countries by 2025 by ensuring that each household is food secure, there is universal access to primary education, there is gender equity, there is universal access to basic health for all, with specific interventions to reduce maternal and child mortality rates; and there is universal access to clean and safe water. All these interventions should contribute to increasing life expectancy from 50 years to 68 years and eliminate abject poverty in the country. Goal 2: A country cherishing good governance and the rule of law and ensuring its people are empowered with the capacity to make their leaders and public servants accountable imbued with a culture of accountability, rewarding good performance and effectively curbing corruption and other vices in society; and Goal 3: Attained the status of a middle-income country (USD 3,000 per capita per annum) with a high level of human development. The economy will have been transformed from a low-productivity agricultural economy to a semi-industrialized one led by modernized and highly productive agricultural activities effectively integrated and buttressed by supportive industrial and service activities in the rural and urban areas. A solid foundation for a competitive and dynamic economy will have been laid with high productivity, competitive, and an inclusive industrial economy by 2025. The coordination of TDV2025 implementation was vested in the President’s Office, National Planning Commission, with plans to evaluate its progress every five years. The government was expected to be the main funder of TDV2025 implementation, relying on taxation revenue and borrowing from domestic and external sources. Sector ministries, departments and agencies were envisaged as the main implementing institutions through regular annual budgetary resources, projects, and programs involving the private sector as the main partners in the development process. OBJECTIVE OF THE EVALUATION OF TDV2025 The assignment aimed to evaluate TDV 2025 implementation, governing institutions, and its instruments to identify evidence on progress made, achievements attained, lessons learnt, and challenges experienced and make recommendations towards formulating a new Tanzania Development Vision (TDV 2050). The assessment also specifically obtained views from stakeholders on lessons learnt and policy recommendations for the formulation of the new Vision 2050. METHODOLOGY Evidence of the progress made in TDV2025 implementation was obtained from secondary and primary sources. Information from secondary sources included government routine reports, program reports and global comparative reports by international agencies. Primary sources involved interviewing different categories of public and private sector stakeholders in 20 regions of Tanzania using specially designed survey instruments that covered some 216 Key Informant Interviews (KII) (15 more than planned) and 41 Focus Group Discussions (FGDs) as planned, in which 538 persons participated. Additionally, 24 zonal workshops and meetings were convened, engaging 294 participants from special interest groups such as the Tanzania Private Sector Foundation (TPSF), Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs), and the Diaspora and Development Partners (DPs). The evaluation results, therefore, combined information from documents with empirical evidence from the different sectors, which was corroborated by the views of citizens. TDV 2025 GOALS PERFORMANCE Goal 1: Improved Livelihoods Stakeholders’ opinions on the nine targets under the goal of improved livelihoods suggested that overall, the top three most impressively performed were education (23.6%), primary health care (21.6%) and food security (10.7%). The analysis of the nine areas is summarized below. Target 1: Food and Nutrition Security The food self-sufficiency ratio (FSSR) was taken as a proxy of food security whereby the target by 2025 is 140-150 percent, so the surplus is used as a buffer for poor seasons and exports. xii | Page Successes  The country generally managed to increase its food self-sufficiency ratio from below 110 percent in the 1990s to between 114 and 120 percent after 2000, during which the number of districts reporting famine also declined. The Vision also envisaged a well nourished population, which has been partially successful as evidenced by a reduction in the proportion of children under five years suffering from stunting and underweight from 48.3 percent and 25.3 percent in 1999 to 30 percent and 12 percent in 2022, respectively. The achievements in enhancing food security and a well-nourished society were driven by a combination of national program promoting good agricultural practices (e.g., area expansion of both rainfed and irrigated land, occasional use of subsidized fertilizers and improved seeds), food fortification of micro-nutrients (including iodized salt) and nutritional education provided to mothers. Among the most recent developments in financing agricultural value chains, commercial banks (e.g., NMB and CRDB) have considered reducing single-digit lending rates to the agricultural sector’s primary production value chain. There are also some pilot insurance schemes aimed at primary agricultural undertakings. Challenges  Low crop and livestock productivity persist due to low application of good agricultural practices, including underutilizing available high irrigation potential land and over-dependence on imported fertilizers and improved seeds. This indicates that agricultural transformation from low to high-productivity agriculture, as envisaged in TDV 2025, has fallen below expectations. The level of productivity of agriculture is still low, and the sector is not sufficiently modernized. The country is still dependent on imported wheat (98%), edible vegetable oil (66%), sugar (25%), fertilizers (more than 75%) and improved seeds. Zanzibar is exceptionally more dependent on a broader range of food imports than Tanzania Mainland. Food micro-nutrient fortification is limited to large processors, leaving out medium and small processors who handle and supply the bulk of processed food to consumers. Until recently (2022/23), government budget allocation to the agricultural sector was much lower than its unique strategic contribution to economic growth, food security and poverty reduction. The food basket taken as part of food security excludes some essential items such as edible vegetable oil, wheat, and sugar, which are still imported in large amounts. Also, animal and plant proteins essential for nutritive foods, are excluded from the FSSR computation. Moreover, the country’s food and nutrition security is still highly vulnerable to vagaries of weather due to high dependence on rainfall. Target 2: Universal Primary Education Provided The target for universal access to primary school education was to enroll all school-age children involving the first 13-14 years of age up to Standard Seven. Success  The country has made some remarkable progress in realizing the target of attaining universal primary school enrolment due to combined investments made by the government, the private sector, and faith-based organizations (FBOs), coupled with continuous efforts to ensure desirable ratios between teachers and students, as well as the number of basic books and sitting desks in classrooms. The primary school gross enrolment rate (GER) increased from 69 percent in 1999 to 97 percent in 2022, with the schooling completion rate also increasing from 51 percent in 2000 to 69 percent in 2020. The pass rate for the primary standard seven examinations has improved from 22 percent in 2000 to 80 percent in 2020. The transition rate from Standard VII to Form I have increased from 20 xiii | Page percent in 2000 to 70 percent in 2020. Following this success, the government increased the minimum level of compulsory basic education from Primary Standard VII to Secondary education level of Form IV to be realized by 2025. On the other hand, Zanzibar surpassed the target of universal primary education such that by 2019, GER was 118.1 percent, being an exception among the Lower Middle-Income Countries (LMICs) globally. Challenges  Among the main weaknesses has been the low levels of academic competence of children completing primary standard VII and those finishing secondary school Form IV. In addition, there is a lack of a life skill-based education system that prepares them to be productive citizens ready for both formal and informal sectors/self employment. The rapid expansion aggravated the shortage of teachers, reaching one teacher handling 51 pupils (1:51.4) in 2023, higher than the recommended ratio of 1:45 in primary schools. Target 3: Gender Equality and Empowerment The Vision envisaged empowering women by dismantling barriers that prevent women from accessing social and economic opportunities. Successes  The government has, over time, implemented policies that facilitated women's empowerment such that the girl child now has equal access to primary and secondary education, with increasing proportion of women enrolled in tertiary education. At the same time there are relatively more adult women holding decision-making positions in politics (as councilors and members of parliament) and in managerial and executive positions in public and private sector institutions (e.g., banking and mining sectors). Challenges  Cultural values and traditions still torment the girls from early ages such that they are not psychologically ready to compete with men later in life for decision-making positions in politics and business. Target 4: Access to Quality Primary Health Care The Vision recognized that primary health care was essential to citizens to have a healthy workforce for attaining human and economic development and therefore planned to have a dispensary in every village (within walking distance of 5 kilometers), a health center in every ward and a hospital in each district. Successes  The proportion of health facilities with a core set of relevant essential medicines available and affordable on a sustainable basis has significantly increased from 64 percent in 2015 to 78 percent in 2022. Zanzibar appears to have done better since 2019, when 99.1 percent of households were located within 5 kilometers of a health facility. However, in Tanzania Mainland, national and regional referral hospitals can now offer medical procedures hitherto available overseas only. Tanzania can now provide some medical tourism as patients come for health services from some Southern African Development Community (SADC) and East African Community (EAC) countries. Progress has been made to enhance access to health care services by promoting universal health insurance for every citizen and ensuring a dispensary is available in every village. xiv | Page Challenges  About one-quarter of villages have yet to get own dispensaries to reduce travel distance to the nearest health facility villages. Moreover, despite the occasional staff shortages and medical equipment, the implementation of universal health insurance is ongoing but unlikely to cover all citizens at a reasonable cost and value-for-money service coverage. The under-staffing of facilities located in remote parts of the country frustrates patients. Target 5: Access to Quality Reproductive Health Care The target was to reduce the maternal mortality rate (MMR) caused by the death of pregnant women while giving birth from above 600 deaths per 100,000 live births in 2000 to below MMR of 265 per 100,000 live births by 2025. Successes  The proportion of women aged 15-49 years with a live birth in each period who received antenatal care four or more times increased from below 40 percent in the early 2000s to about 65 percent in 2022. Consequently, the MMR among Tanzanian women decreased from more than 750 per 100,000 live births in 2000 to about 235 per 100,000 live births in 2020, thus surpassing the MMR benchmark of 265 per 1,000 live births in some reference Middle-Income Countries (MICs). Challenges  Absence of primary health care facilities for some villages and difficulty tracking and monitoring pregnant women in nomadic pastoral communities. Although pregnant women attend antenatal clinics, some cannot afford to buy basic delivery kits due to a shortage of the kits in public facilities. Target 6: Reduced Infant Mortality Rate The target was to reduce the infant mortality rate (IMR) from 85 per 1,000 live births in 2000 to be comparable with the IMR benchmark of 43 per 1,000 live births in lower-middle-income countries (LMICs). Similarly, aimed to reduce the under-five mortality rate (U5-MR) of 112 per 1,000 live births to be comparable with that in LMICs of 57 per 1,000 live births. Success  The country has reduced IMR from about 85 deaths per 1,000 live births in 2000 to about 36 deaths per 1,000 live births in 2022. Likewise, the mortality rate of children under five years of age has been reduced to 49 deaths per 1,000 live births, compared to about 130 deaths per 1,000 live births in 2000. The proportion of stillbirths also declined from about 25.9 per 1,000 births to 18.6 deaths per 1,000 births. The recorded successes are attributed to national programs on massive vaccination against infectious diseases during pregnancies and after giving birth and training adequate numbers of formal and informally trained birth attendants to cover most of the villages. Challenges  Absence of primary health care facilities for some of the villages. Corruption persists in some health facilities. Tracking and monitoring children under five moving with their parents has also been difficult among nomadic pastoral communities. Consequently, although Tanzania Mainland and Zanzibar appear to have reduced IMR to 49 and 45 deaths xv | Page per 1,000 live births, respectively, they are still half-way to reaching the ideal target of 20 for LMICs. Target 7: Universal Access to Safe Water at Short Distance The target was to increase the proportion of the rural population with access to piped or protected water as their primary source from 50 percent in 2000 to 85 percent by 2025. The corresponding target for the urban population is 95 percent. Successes  By December 2022, the proportion of the rural population with access to safe and clean water had reached 77 percent, while in urban areas, it had reached 88 percent, suggesting that the targets for 2025 are most likely to be attained. Zanzibar surpassed the target by 2019, the proportion of rural households with access to clean water was 88.3 percent, whereas, in urban areas, it was 95.9 percent. This is possible due to establishing a special water fund with stable and predictable sources managed by a dedicated Rural and Urban Water and Sanitation Agency (RUWASA) and Zanzibar Water Authority (ZAWA). The government has also established 17 laboratories in 17 regions to monitor water safety using samples from more than 2,090 water sources and 4,600 water distribution schemes in rural and urban areas. Challenges  Budgetary constraints result in a relatively slower pace of investments in water supply compared with population growth and the formalization of new human settlements. Climate change effects result in many unproductive drilled wells. Limited innovative technologies to explore, utilize and manage sustainably available water resources. Target 8: Life Expectancy Increased The life expectancy of Tanzanians in 2000 was about 52 years. It was envisioned that by 2025, it would be increased to 68 years, comparable to most MICs. Successes  This target is most likely to be attained, given that it reached about 68 years by 2022. This appears to be a consequence of the country’s decision to invest in key drivers of life expectancy, namely, education, primary health care, maternal health care, and access to clean water, as shown elsewhere in this report. There are special windows/desks for attending to the elderly in hospitals, and homes for the elderly have been established. TASAF also gives special attention to the elderly. Zanzibar introduced a monthly allowance of TZS 20,000 for the elderly. Challenges  There is a lack of public social services for the elderly, and no monthly allowance is provided for the elderly in Tanzania Mainland. Medical care costs for senior citizens can be high and unaffordable to many, and most lack medical insurance coverage. The few who wish to take medical health insurance obtain it at prohibitive costs, which increase with age. The health insurance policies don’t cover key ailments typical with older people. xvi | Page Target 9: Absence of Abject Poverty Abject poverty is considered the lowest and most extreme form, whereby it’s difficult to get even one basic meal per day, let alone find shelter to live in. It was envisioned that the proportion of Tanzanians living in abject poverty would be reduced to a single-digit percentage, from about 19 percent in 2000, with Zanzibar aiming more specifically to reduce the abject level to ten percent by 2020. Success  The realization of this target is on the margins of just below ten percent, with Zanzibar having succeeded in reducing the proportion of food poverty to 9.3 percent by 2020. The target to reduce abject poverty was consistently mentioned as elusive by all stakeholders consulted as part of the TDV2025 evaluation in both Tanzania Mainland and Zanzibar. One of the reasons provided was the inability to implement programs with a high propensity to create pro-poor employment and the lack of innovative initiatives by Local Governments to cater to the needs of young people out of college. Challenges  The level of economic growth is not robust enough to create employment for income generation, given that the agricultural sector, which has a higher potential to create jobs, had the lowest growth rate due to low investments for an extended period. Poverty is still higher in rural Tanzania Mainland and Zanzibar areas than in Tanzania Mainland and Zanzibar urban areas. Most of the undertaken mega infrastructural projects were also not pro-poor. The population growth rate increased from 2.8 percent to 3.2 percent in the latest population census (2022), compared to the overall economic growth rate of about 6-7 percent or about 4 percent in the agricultural sector, leading to net growth rates of 3 and 1 percent, respectively. Goal 2: Good Governance Target 1: Moral and Cultural Uprightness It was envisioned that in 2025, Tanzanians would remain truthful to their acceptable moral and cultural values and desist from external influences in dressing codes and abuse of alcohol and drugs. Families, places of worship, educational institutions, and the media are key centers for molding societal morals and culture. Successes  Among the measures taken was establishing a self-vetting common code of ethics for media professionals and broadcasters and the joint support by the Media Council of Tanzania (MCT) and the Government. Media houses have tried to disseminate locally made content in music, drama, and movies, contrary to the situation in 1999 when the drafters of TDV 2025 lamented the media being agents of promoting foreign cultural and moral values. To prevent the spread of illicit drug abuse, the Drug Control and Enforcement Authority (DCEA) was established with powers to conduct investigation, arrest, search, and seizure. Some 42 Drug Rehabilitation Centers (or Sober Houses) have been built in different parts of the country. Challenges  (a) lack of coherent national integrity policy to guide efforts by different stakeholders in building a morally and culturally upright society; there is only the Public xvii | Page Service Code of Conduct and the Public Leadership Code of Ethics Act which act as guides to how these few people should behave. Needed is an instrument that covers all Tanzanians; (b) globalization trends, facilitated by electronic media, have taken over the minds and souls of the younger generation leading to imitation of foreign cultures; (c) licensing businesses (e.g. casinos and nightclubs) that negatively influence morality; (d) lifestyle of parents, including prevalence of single parents, abstaining from taking care of their children; (e) Low public awareness and knowledge on handling victims of drug abuse; and, (f) Limited budgetary resources to implement programmes such as sober houses for substance abusers. Target 2: Adherence and Respect to the Rule of Law TDV2025 envisioned a country with adherence to the rule of law, which could be reflected by, among others, a decline in cases of breach of the law. Successes  Records from 2016 to 2020 indicate that there has been some decline in reported cases of murder, which declined from 3,318 to 2,225 cases, child stealing (from 170 to 84 cases), armed robbery (726 to 297 incidences), robbery in highway (29 to none), robbery with violence (from 3,945 to 1,487 cases), financial crimes (1,990 to 905 cases) and possession of illicit drugs (679 to 429). However, criminal incidences showed an insignificant decline, such as theft of motorcycles, livestock theft and illicit local liquor brewing. This overall success in reducing cases of different types of criminal acts was made possible through measures to establish and build the Watchdog and Oversight Institutions (WOIs) capacity to improve governance and enforce the rule of law in the country. Challenges  There is a widespread culture of preference for informalities and disrespect for laws, rules, and procedures, with some sections of the population, especially among leaders, ignoring them with impunity. Citizens are also unaware of their rights and obligations in adhering to the rule of law. Low capacity within law-dispensing institutions eroded confidence in the due processes for dispensing justice. Consequently, it attracts corrupt practices, resulting in a growing culture of mob justice when suspects of breach of the laws are apprehended. Target 3: Absence of Corruption and Other Vices The need to deal with corruption as one of the targets under the governance goal emanated from the observations made in the Warioba Report of 1996/97. There was a resolution to build a society supported by institutions with zero tolerance for corruption. Successes  Different surveys and research reports have shown that corruption levels have decreased gradually. The ranking by Transparency International (TI) indicates the country improved its score from 25 among the most corrupt countries globally in 2000 to 39 and 38 in 2021 and 2022, respectively. Service delivery has noticeably improved, resulting in increased trust in the Government; the National Governance and Corruption Survey (NGACS) conducted in 2020 also indicated that 88.6 percent of interviewed stakeholders perceived that corruption levels had decreased (63.6%) or significantly decreased (25%), compared to the situation in 2014/15. About 85 percent of the respondents perceived public xviii | Page services as responsive to the population's needs. Other search organizations that have indicated the downward trend include the World Justice Project whose data show that Tanzania has improved her score from 0.37 in 2015 to 0.42 in 2021 but went down to 0.41 in 2023. Afrobarometer (rounds 7 and 8) also show a downtrend. Earlier surveys in 2014 showed that most respondents – 67 percent – felt that corruption had increased in the last 12 months. Only 13 percent felt that it had decreased. But in the 7th round in 2017, 72 percent of respondents believed corruption was decreasing, and only 10 percent thought it was increasing. A government’s own survey by the PO-PSM & GG showed that corruption was on a downward trend moving from 67 percent in 2014 to 44 percent in 2017 (URT, 2022). This was made possible by implementing the necessary legal and institutional infrastructure and interventions for prevention and combating corruption. The application of ICT was cited as among the enabling factors for the success in driving down corruption. All public institutions have been taking measures to promote good governance. Among other efforts undertaken to enhance moral uprightness include the establishment of Integrity Committees in all public institutions, the obligation of public servants to take an oath that they will observe the Public Service Code of Conduct, awareness Campaign against Corruption through various platforms, the establishment in 2009 of the Ethics Tribunal as per the Public Leadership Code of Ethics Act No. 13 of 1995 (under section 26(1) to enforce the code). Challenges  Inadequate services/goods or cumbersome procedures to access public services create conditions for corruption, which is worsening in institutions lacking transparency. Lack of public awareness of their basic rights to be served prompt citizens to believe they have to offer bribes to be served. Monopolistic and/or discretionary powers among service providers or officials have also been a driver of corrupt practices. Target 4: Learning Society There was a desire to build a well-educated and learning society whose people are ingrained with a developmental mindset and competitive spirit to participate in the regional and global market. Continuous learning was done at three levels: (a) at the individual level, Tanzanians sought to acquire requisite skills and knowledge to be able to explore and benefit from the development opportunities in the competitive labor market; (b) at firm or enterprise level, and (c) at the government level, learning in terms of best practices, success, lessons learned what worked well and what did not work well (challenges) were well integrated in designing and planning to inform implementation of the various interventions related to the TDV2025. Successes  We appear to have done very well at the individual level, whereby the number of Tanzanians receiving formal education has increased at different levels. For example, in 2021, Tanzania had 18,553 primary schools with 10.9 million pupils, 5,280 secondary schools with 2.3 million students and 49 universities with 240,523 students. In 2000, the University of Dar es Salaam and Sokoine University of Agriculture (SUA) were the only full-fledged universities in Tanzania. Facilities to enable continuous learning to have been introduced in the country, including the availability of social media platforms that barely existed in 2000. Tanzania is now among the countries with many social media users in Africa, with about 9.9 million WhatsApp users, 6 million Facebook users, 3.15 million YouTube users, and 594,800 Twitter (X) in 2022. This implies that Tanzanians are massively exploring learning, news, and entertainment opportunities through social media. At the firm xix | Page level, they supported government efforts through contributions to the skills development level, primarily used for expanding training for vocational education (spearheaded by VETA and some privately owned colleges). On the Government side, all public programs and projects needed in-built monitoring, evaluation, and learning, with planned mid- and end term evaluations. Challenges  Much as the desire to achieve a development mindset and competitive spirit was expressed, no explicit targets were set to achieve a development mindset and competitive spirit. There is no evidence that Tanzanians have developed a development mindset and competitive spirit to enable them to participate effectively in the regional and global markets. The lack of reading culture among Tanzanians has limited the ability to imbibe knowledge from published materials. On the other hand, the digital divide between urban and rural areas has limited online learning among rural people due to limited internet infrastructure. There are also inadequate official support systems for promoting innovations Tanzanians generate, especially those in rural areas. Young people are not adequately protected from undesirable content disseminated through social media and mainstream mass media. Target 5: Political Stability and Absence of Violence TDV2025 prescribed giving people more voice through practical, democratically conducted, peaceful political elections. Success  This principle was started in October 1995 and has continued uninterrupted every five years without fail and devoid of politically motivated violence. A “national dialogue platform” for political parties was established in mid-2023. The country has participated in peacekeeping missions in other countries. Challenges  Occasional lack of genuine tolerance for multi-party politics, probably emanating from historical belief in a one-party supremacy system. The voter turnout ratio has been declining in successive elections since 1995. There have been some limitations on the abuse of freedom of expression on national matters. There has also been a lack of capacity of the media for objective analysis, opinion, and reporting on matters of public interest, with some exceptions, such as the need for a new constitution, which were among the issues to be accomplished by 2025. Goal 3: Building a Strong and Competitive Industrial Economy Target 1: Diversified and Semi-industrialized Economy Successes  The combined contribution of industry, construction and manufacturing to the country’s GDP increased from 24.3 percent in 2000 to 35.6 percent in 2022, implying a 54.7 percent increase in 22 years and an annual increase of 2.48 percent. The performance of the manufacturing sub-sectors' contribution to GDP on its own was around seven percent, below the target of 12.5 percent. The apparent growth in the industrial sector’s contribution to GDP overshadowed that of the agricultural sector, which declined from 36.2 percent to 24.5 percent during the same period. In 2022, the manufacturing subsector exported xx | Page Given the evidence from official data, it can be concluded that the target of a diversified and semi industrial economy is yet to be achieved. products worth USD 1,321.6 million, up from USD 43.1 million, (about 3000%) in the year 2000. The performance in 2022 was 18.6 percent of total export earnings. As of July 2023, exports from this sub-sector reached USD 1402.2 million, an increase of 6.1 percent over 2022. Challenges  Weak linkage and growth of agricultural-based industries and other resource based industries. Relatively high cost for value addition of agricultural and other raw materials due to the high cost of power and water. A significant challenge is the lack of a clear and implementable industrialization strategy with clear roles for the private and public sectors. The country still relies on imported manufactured goods for lack of similar items produced locally. It also relies on imported intermediate goods for locally manufactured goods. Target 2: Macro-economic Stability Since the launching of TDV 2025, the government has highly emphasized practicing sound macroeconomic management principles, most of them being part of IMF agreements and later becoming part of regional agreements among SADC and EAC member states. The country has, over the past 22 years, except for a few years, such as the global financial and food crisis in 2008/09 and recently the COVID-19 phenomenon and Russia/Ukraine war managed to keep the inflation rate below five percent. Simultaneously, inflation has been kept at single digits since 2000 except for 2008 (10.3%) and 2009 (12.1%) due to the 2008 global financial and food crisises. Recent data show that inflation has been controlled at single digits and has been below five percent during the past five years. Year 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 Inflation Rate (%) 5.3 3.5 3.4 3.3 3.7 4.3 Source: Bank of Tanzania Over the years, the country has maintained adequate official foreign reserves to cover a minimum of 4 months of the import bill, maintained external borrowing at sustainable debt levels, and allowed stable fluctuations of the foreign exchange rate. The macro-economic policies, coupled with a stable political environment, attracted foreign direct investment flows into different sectors of the economy such that Tanzania has been among a few Sub-Sahara African (SSA) countries to sustain reasonably high annual economic growth rates despite the unforeseen externalities occasioned by drought, food shortages, financial crises, wars, However, unfolding global geopolitics influenced by the Russia-Ukraine war, the weakening of the US Dollars, and the response by OPEC countries, led by Saudi Arabia, to cut down oil production pose a challenge to the government of Tanzania on its ability to refrain from pursuing monetary and fiscal policies that may trigger inflation, deplete foreign exchange reserves, and increase government debt burden to unsustainable levels contrary to the TDV2025 aspirations. and COVID-19. xxi | Page Challenges  Lack of adequate trickle-down effect from established industries, mainly because they are not linked to high employment potential sectors such as agriculture. High cost of borrowing from the formal banking sector. Lack of financial literacy among small and micro-enterprises. Unstable conditions of the external sector due to high dependence on imports and low levels of exports. Lack of sustainability of the economy due to drastic weather effects. Target 3: GDP Growth Rate of 8 Percent or More It aspired that Tanzania would have attained a lower MIC (LMIC) status of USD 3,000 per capita by 2025, propelled by the growth real GDP growth rate of an annual average of 8-9 percent from 2005 to 2010 and after that from 10 percent or more from 2010 to 2025. The baseline rate was four percent in 2000 for Tanzania Mainland and Zanzibar. However, Zanzibar set a modest GDP per capita target of USD 1,036 (the threshold for LMIC status), surpassed in 2000 when it reached USD 1,114 per capita in 2019. Successes  These growth targets were part of the consequent Five Year Development Plans (FYDPs) but could not be realized as the highest level attained over the past 22 years was 7.7 percent in 2011. Using spliced GDP data, the average GDP growth rate between 2000 and 2021 was 6.7 percent per annum (pa). As earlier mentioned, the latest low growth rate below five percent was influenced by the COVID-19 pandemic, the Russia-Ukraine war, and partly by drought. The government forecasts GDP growth of 5.2 percent in 2023 and 6.1 percent in 2024. On the other hand, Fitch forecasts are 5.2 and 6 percent in 2023 and 2024, respectively. The World Bank estimates growth in 2023 to be 5.1 percent, while the medium term growth is projected at 5.8 percent, citing “weakening demand, persistent inflationary pressures and high-interest rates preventing more robust expansion”. In May/June 2023, Moody’s and Fitch issued a sovereign credit rating report on Tanzania of B2+ and B+, respectively, confirming the positive outlook of the economy. Notably, among the assumptions for attaining an economic growth rate beyond eight percent was the reduction of the population growth rate to 2.0 percent below, which could not be realized as its rate was stuck at about 2.8 percent in the consequent population census of 2012 and 2022. Challenges  Susceptibility to external shocks such as the global financial crisis, adverse weather, and pandemics (e.g., COVID-19). Based on the actual and forecast GDP growth rate to date, it is highly unlikely that the Vision’s target of ten percent or more by 2025 will be realized in the remaining two years. Target 4: Adequate Physical Infrastructure for all Sectors A well-developed and managed hard and soft infrastructure is key for economic development. It reduces business costs, attracts private sector investment, facilitates xxii | Page production and service delivery, and links markets. The composite effect of good physical infrastructure is sustainable high GDP growth and poverty reduction. Successes  Among the notable achievements for the past 22 years include: a) Roads provide 70 percent of Tanzania’s transport needs. The road network connects the urban and the rural areas and is broadly categorized as national/trunk, regional, district and village/feeder roads. In 1999, the road network covered about 85,000 km, but this length increased to 181,190 km by 2022, as summarized below, and the most significant change is that of rural roads, whose total length has expanded by 381.4 percent over the past 22 years. Year Total Road Network (km) National Trunk roads (km) Of which Tarmac (km) Of which Regional (km) Of which Rural (km) 2000 85,000.0 10,300 3,830 24,700 30,000.0 2022 181,190.1 36,730 - - 144,429.8 Rate of increase over 22 years 113.2 % 256.6 % - - 381.4 % Source: see detailed data in Chapter 3 of this report. In addition, the government has invested heavily in building more bridges and establishing one-stop center service posts at border posts to improve cross-border movement, reducing the cost of cross-border trade. b) The Railway Network managed by Tanzania Railways Corporation (TRC, with 2,722 km stretching from Dar-es-salaam to Kigoma (via Tabora), Mwanza (via Tabora) and Arusha (via Tanga and Moshi) and Tanzania Zambia Railway Authority (TAZARA, with 1,860 km from Dar-es-salaam to Tunduma in Tanzania and onward to Kapirimposhi in Zambia) has remained unchanged for a long time. The network has suffered gross undercapitalization and shortage of operational capital, run-down infrastructure, and rolling stock. However, this scenario will change soon after the completion of a new Standard Gauge Railway (SGR) project that started in 2017 to cover the central corridor to Mwanza and Kigoma. The investment will increase the railway network by 1,219 km (Dar es Salaam to Mwanza line) starting at the end of 2023. c) Air transport is characterized by heavy involvement by the government through its national carrier, Air Tanzania Corporation Limited (ATCL), whose services have gone through a series of ups and downs during the past two decades. However, a decision was made by the Government in 2016/17 to revamp ATCL as part of its flagship projects in the Five-Year Development Plans. Since then, the airline has acquired 13 new passengers and one cargo aircraft on lease from the Tanzania Government Flight Agency (TGFA), and three more are under procurement. The Government has also invested in air transport infrastructure. Among the new improvements is the expansion of Dar-es-salaam and Zanzibar International Airports, and the modernization of regional airports such as Songea, Iringa, and Mpanda, as well as the construction of new airports at Songwe, Geita and Dodoma (ongoing). Pemba Airport was upgraded to provide 24 xxiii | Page hour service. New air space radar facilities for aircraft navigation also serve these airports. d) Lake and Ocean transportation improvements: There have been significant improvements in the handling capacity of the major seaports of Dar-es-salaam, Tanga, and Mtwara, as well as the lake ports of Mwanza and Kigoma. This was done parallel to renovating, building, and commissioning new passenger and cargo ships to serve the major lakes of Mwanza (e.g., MV Victoria), Tanganyika (e.g., MV Liemba), and Nyasa (e.g., MV Njombe). However, plans to build a new port at Mbegani in Bagamoyo were delayed but are likely to take off before 2025. In Zanzibar, in addition to improvements in major ports in Unguja and Pemba, the government improved the fleet of ships by introducing a new passenger ship, MV Mapinduzi II and an oil tanker ship, MT Ukombozi II, with a capacity of carrying 3,500 tons of oil. e) Reliable and competitively priced energy is key to propelling development, private sector investment and business, and producing goods and services at competitive prices. In 2023, about 78.4 percent of Tanzanian households had access to electricity, with Zanzibar at about 84 percent. This is a significant improvement compared to 1999, when the level of connections to private houses was only about ten percent and less than one percent in the rural areas. It is now projected that 12,318 villages will be connected by June 2024. The initiative is part of the Presidential directive issued in 2022 that at least 80 percent of Tanzanians should have access to safe and clean cooking energy by 2032. f) Telecommunication is a sub-sector that has recorded phenomenal growth since 2001, when the country had only one telephone/voice service provider, Tanzania Telecommunication Company Limited (TTCL), with 144 telephone exchanges and a capacity of 239,616 fixed lines. Using the PPP policy framework, the sector has attracted five more telecommunication service providers covering 94 percent of the country, with about 60,192,331 active SIM card mobile connections and 31,172,544 internet users. By 2019/20, 86.2 percent of households had at least one mobile phone. Investment in the National ICT Broadband Backbone (NICTBB), which reached 9,982 km, covering 26 regions by December 2022. The backbone has reached all the key border posts with Kenya, Uganda, Rwanda, DR Congo, Zambia, Malawi, and Mozambique. The success in ICT investment has allowed the initiation of e-learning, e-medicine, e-justice, and e government service provision and online platforms for services such as public financial management, revenue administration, human resource management, payment systems, business registration, insurance, education, and health. Among the most revolutionary services is the financial inclusion brought about by mobile money services. By 2021/22, there were 34,971,596 active mobile money wallet accounts with a mobile market size of TZS 1,158.5 billion. g) Real Estate and Improved Shelter: In 2019, real estate contributed 3.1 percent to Tanzania’s real GDP, with USD 1.5 billion in 2019, compared to USD 1.2 billion in 2015, an increase of 25 percent. In comparison, the contribution of real estate to GDP in Zanzibar increased from 5.2 percent in 2000 to 7.7 percent in 2019. The contribution of real estate to GDP in Zanzibar increased from 5.2 percent in 2000 to 7.7 percent in 2019. The proportion of houses with modern roofs in Tanzania Mainland increased from xxiv | Page 43 percent in 2000 to 84 percent in 2018, lower than that in Zanzibar, whereby 91.3 percent had modern roofs in 2019. Challenges  Weak follow-up implementation of key performance indicators (KPIs) for infrastructural projects leading to high costs, low value for money, and delayed delivery of services. Lack of immediate economic impact due to high dependence on imported goods (e.g., equipment) and services (e.g., expertise). Lack of operation and maintenance culture of infrastructural facilities. Low capacity and unorganized local contractors to win and implement infrastructure projects. In the case of road networks, especially the rural network, there has been a bias towards equipment-based technology instead of labor-based technology, which would have provided more employment to the communities where road construction is carried out. In the case of air transport, there has been the challenge of an inappropriate balance between the role of the public sector and that of the private sector, which is tipped in favor of the public sector. This is a deviation from the directive of TDV 2025. This indicates that despite several amendments, the PPP policy has not been put to work during this period. There was the challenge of slow energy diversification in the case of energy. Most of the investments went into hydropower instead of diversifying sources of energy. RESOURCE MOBILIZATION FOR FINANCING TDV2025 The government relied on different funding sources, including external borrowing, whose proportion has declined over time, to improve domestic tax collection and management. However, although during the initiation of FYDP-I, there were plans to use some innovative funding approaches such as municipal bonds, infrastructure bonds and natural resource bonds, not much progress has been made in applying those instruments. It has, therefore, continued to rely on its domestic resources and, if borrowed externally, on concessional loans for project implementation and grants for project preparation. The country’s ability to mobilize domestic resources is exemplified by the experience of more than doubling revenue collection within ten years from 2011/12 to 2021/22, whose amount increased from TZS 4,293.1 billion in 2008/09 (89.8% of revenue target) to TZS 38,298 billion in 2021/22 (100.8% of revenue targets). Among the development budget execution experiences were years in which the Exchequer disbursed funds significantly less than the budget approved by Parliament, sometimes failing to reach 70 percent, as was the case in 2019/20 (66.2%) and 2013/14 (62.5%). Among the sectors that suffered most from under-disbursement was agriculture, which failed to implement its plans, such as to expand areas under irrigation. Otherwise, once the funds are released, the absorption rate was reasonably good, surpassing 97 percent in the past three years (see Table 3.19). LESSONS LEARNED FROM COMPARATOR COUNTRIES a) Infrastructure development: Higher levels of investment in enablers for real economic growth, notably electrical energy for industries, was the main factor that separated a set comparator country from Tanzania. In the power supply, the comparator countries had already attained electricity supply above 200 kWh per capita before graduating to MIC status compared to Tanzania’s 95 kWh per capita in 2010, some 15 years before 2025. xxv | Page b) The relative contribution of agricultural and industrial sectors to GDP in comparator LMIC some 16 years before attaining MIC status had reached around 24 percent. In contrast, during the same remaining years to 2025, its contribution was 28.4 percent. The manufacturing sector of the LMICs contributed 17.8 percent to GDP in the year of graduation, compared to 9.4 percent for Tanzania in 2009. It was feared that reaching 17-18 percent by 2025 would be challenging, given the power supply state necessary for manufacturing to thrive. c) Role of SMEs in industrial development and contribution to GDP: Whereas SMEs in Tanzania contributed 22.6 percent of Tanzania’s GDP and more than 80 percent of formal employment, those in Indonesia contributed 58.3 percent to GDP and 80-95 percent of employment generation. SMEs in China accounted for 90 percent of the country’s enterprises. xxvi | Page OVERALL SUMMARY OF LESSONS LEARNED Cross-Cutting Lessons a) Need for predictability of policies, strategies and institutional frameworks for planning and implementing development initiatives. For example, the Planning Commission responsible for preparing TDV2025 was dissolved in 2016, only to be revived in 2023. There have also been frequent changes in ministerial portfolios, e.g., in the last six years, the Investment Portfolio has been shifted to different ministries. b) Achieving inclusive economic growth requires special attention to transforming those sectors that carry most people, such as the agricultural sector. c) Building an inclusive, competitive, semi-industrialized economy, the sectors with proportionately higher contributions to the recorded GDP growth for the last 22 years failed to benefit most Tanzanians. Therefore, in future, there should be special attention to transforming those sectors, the easiest being the agriculture sector (crops, livestock, fisheries, and forestry), which can have higher multiplier effects through backward and forward linkages. d) Life expectancy preparedness in handling and ensuring the provision of prerequisite social services to senior citizens should entail partnership between government, civil society organizations, and private sector actors. e) ICT application and use in digitizing public service delivery can enhance transparency and accountability among ministries, departments, and agencies. f) Need for focus and dedication to pursue agreed national priorities. For example, in the energy sector, the strategy was to invest in developing natural gas for power generation. Still, it was partially implemented, resulting in underutilization of the gas pipeline and power shortages. g) Importance of allocating the requisite financial and human resources commensurate with the approved development plans. Low funds disbursement to implement projects made it difficult for public officials to be objectively evaluated on the committed key performance indicators. h) Need to avoid over-ambitious investments not supported by adequate financial and human resources, as well as balancing between development expenditure and recurrent expenditure. For example, the building of health facilities and classrooms without adequate health personnel and teachers. i) Need to have an enabling environment that empowers citizens to promote local content that effectively enhances the participation of citizens in economic activities as per the Constitution Article 8(1) (d) to enable the private sector to thrive. There is a need to hasten the pace of implementing local content in all sectors, including building the capacity of local contractors so that they can actively participate in mega infrastructure xxvii | Page projects and ultimately contribute and maximize the internalization of investments through domestic backwards and forward linkages. j) Need to sequence the implementation of prioritized projects. For example, the development of basic industries for iron and steel (from Liganga and Mchuchuma) was planned to come before commencing the building of SGR. In practice, the construction of SGR has preceded the implementation of the iron and steel project, resulting in huge imports of steel and the use of foreign exchange. k) Population growth and structure that commensurate with population growth and ensure that population growth rate corresponds to economic growth rate, hence the need to maintain a balance between population growth and economic growth so that there is an adequate translation of the economic growth to household incomes and improved livelihoods. l) It was realized that the practice of being preoccupied with PRSP and MKUKUTA, which were initiated and supported by donors, was covering narrower ground than TDV 2025 had called for. The need to strike a balanced approach considering both improved social services (e.g., health, water, education, food security and shelter) and enhancement of infrastructural services (e.g., transport, energy, and communication) to strengthen the real economy. Despite the presumed good intention of Development Partners (DPs) focusing more on Goal 1 and Goal 2 under MKUKUTA2, it was feared that if the real economy did not perform as expected, there would be no adequate tax revenue to maintain the investments made for improved social services. This lesson made a case for returning to five-year plans as an instrument to implement TDV 2025. m) There is a need for a robust plan for financial resource mobilization and creating an enabling business environment for the foreign and domestic private sectors to invest in industries and businesses. The lack of a robust plan for resource mobilization continued to pose a challenge to the implementation of TDV and five-year plans through the TDV period. n) Adherence to the approved monitoring and evaluation framework on a regular and institutionalized basis is needed, including regular evaluation of the Vision every five years, to allow for earlier corrective measures in weak areas of implementation. o) Need to have a dedicated secretariat for coordination of TDV2025, which would have, among other things, the task of preparation and implementation of a Communication and Dissemination Strategy. This was based on the realization that a small proportion of Tanzanians, including political leaders, were aware of the existence of TDV2025. p) In governance, the need for a pluralistic approach to enhance success in building a morally and culturally upright society requires joint efforts by government, private sector, and civil society organizations. There is a need for a solid and efficient decentralized system that can enforce transparency and accountability at the local level in line with 2 Mpango wa Kukuza Uchumi na Kupunguza Umaskini Tanzania (National Strategy for Growth and Poverty Reduction (NSGPR) xxviii | Page subsidiarity principles. Also, there is a need to respect the independence of strong oversight institutions to enforce public sector accountability to the taxpayer. Active engagement of the public, civil society organizations (including faith-based institutions) and the private sector businesses in the campaign to enhance governance and the rule of law instead of leaving the matter to oversight and watchdog institutions alone. q) Need for sustained champions on agreed national projects, including the championing of National Development Vision. Sector-Specific Lessons a) Education: There is a need to promote competence and skill-based education systems that respond to the needs of industries/sectors, create jobs for locals and promote complementarity between local human resources and foreigners. It is also essential to have an adequate ratio of students to teachers/tutors. b) Gender empowerment: A change of societal mindset, starting at the family level, is an important factor in the success of empowering women to take more active roles in social and economic spheres nationally and internationally. c) Health services: (i) ensure the right mix of quality infrastructure, retooling, and well trained and motivated human resources; (ii) place a high priority on primary/public health to attain a more appropriate balance between curative and preventive health interventions. d) Water supply: Success in the protection and maintenance of water infrastructure, including water catchments, water storage, and distribution systems, requires effective partnerships between citizens and their governments at different levels. Surrounding communities can effectively guard trees planted in water catchment areas if they feel some ownership of the initiative. KEY ISSUES FOR TDV2050 ARISING FROM TDV2025 EVALUATION An Overview The country needs to protect and sustain the progress gained in the last 22 years in all TDV2025 goals and attributes. It will also be important to capture issues that were identified in the TDV2025 write-up but not addressed and are still relevant. Overall, the following will need to be taken care of for the success of TDV 2050: a) Special focus on the country’s national goals that promote broad-based inclusive economic growth and poverty reduction and ensure that there is adequate and high quality human capital. b) Align with key development goals and targets that are in the UN SDG2030, and other global initiatives are taken onboard TDV2050. Among them are dealing with inclusive and shared growth with minimum abject poverty (slogan: “no one should be left behind”, (part of SDG Goals 1 and 2), climate change adaptation and mitigation as well as xxix | Page ensuring environmental sustainability (part of SDG Goal no.13 on environmental sustainability, life on land (SDG No.15) and life below water (SDG No.14). c) Align with goals and targets under regional (EAC and SADC) and the African Union’s Agenda 2063. Of specific interest is the readiness of Tanzania to participate and benefit from the Pan-African Free Trade Area (AfTA) and customs union implementation. Specifically, some of the key cross-cutting issues to be considered from the above mentioned overall goals include: a) Intensify and strengthen initiatives for the digitization of the economy through ICT to enhance efficiency in service delivery and improve transparency and accountability for both public and private sectors. b) Gradual and strategic adaptations towards high tech 4th industrial revolution for global competitiveness while promoting employment creation. c) Make legislation that will help to stabilize the predictability of policies, strategies, and institutional frameworks for planning and implementing development initiatives so that individual leaders do not change them without due process. d) Ensure that all approved flagship projects that are well planned, appropriately sequenced, and timely are provided with adequate financial (for both capital and operational expenses) and the requisite human resources. e) Provide an enabling environment that empowers citizens to effectively participate in economic activities to enable the private sector to thrive as per the (Blueprint for Regulatory Reforms to Improve the Business Environment (popular as the BLUEPRINT)) document. Promote the use of local content and capacity building of local human resources such as contractors, including the requisite national and international certification, so that they can actively participate in medium-scale and mega infrastructure projects. f) Strict enforcement of Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning (MEL) in all interventions. g) There should be a well-funded Communication Strategy for TDV 2050 to ensure that all segments of the population are knowledgeable about and adequately sensitized. h) Identify champions on agreed national projects, including the championing of the TDV 2050. Goals Proposed for TDV 2050 a) Those carried forward from 2025, namely: (i) improved livelihoods, (ii) governance and rule of law, and (iii) competitive economy and inclusive growth; and, b) New ones, namely: (i) climate change and environmental sustainability, (ii) digital transformation, and (iii) sports, arts, and creative industry. xxx | Page Those mentioned above are elaborated below. Improved Livelihoods a) Pursue a type of development that is people-centered, based on sustainable and shared growth and free from abject poverty. This type of development must mean that the creation of wealth and its distribution in society is fair and equitable. It embraces forms of social and political relations which enhance empowerment and effective democratic and widespread participation of all social groups. This approach to development will ensure that no one is left behind, and abject poverty will be eradicated through employment by promoting investments in sectors with a high propensity for employment creation, such as the agricultural sector and the formalization of informal economic activities. b) Agriculture: (i) Accelerate modernization and commercialization of the agricultural sector that embraces smart agriculture that is resilient to climate changes, (ii) investment in smart irrigation systems, and (iii) agricultural transformation with emphasis on value addition through high productivity and movement up the value chain. c) Smart gender empowerment that includes all categories of gender, having balanced support for boys and girls. d) Education sector: there is a need to have a skills-based education system that responds to the needs of industries/sectors to create jobs for locals and minimize the need to employ foreigners. It is also essential to have an adequate ratio of students to teachers/tutors, considering increasing the use of ICT in delivering education services. e) Health services: (i) ensure the right mix of quality infrastructure, retooling, and well trained and motivated human resources; (ii) place a high priority on primary/public health to attain a more appropriate balance between curative and preventive health interventions. f) Population growth and structure that commensurate with population growth; and (ii) ensure that population growth rate corresponds to economic growth rate. Two specific demographic dynamics will need to be considered: population growth and urbanization and their implications for both human development and economic transformation, as well as their socio-economic and environmental opportunities and challenges. Proper urban planning facilitates development through site planning and planning of economic activities that will make urban centers the drivers of the economy. g) Water supply: (i) protection of water sources, (ii) implement strict maintenance of water supply infrastructure, and (iii) enhance adoption of water harvesting techniques. h) Life Expectancy: To continue increasing through reduced infant and child mortality, improved access to quality health and investment in social protection packages to cater for senior citizens. xxxi | Page Governance and Rule of Law a) Continue to support the establishment and building of a strong and efficient decentralized system that can enforce transparency and accountability at the local level in line with subsidiarity principles. b) Continue to seal loopholes that can erode the principles of separation of power between the three pillars of the state: the executive, the judiciary and parliament. Within each, there will still be a need to strengthen the independence of strong oversight institutions to enforce public sector accountability. c) Complete the process of a new constitution as was aspired in TDV2025. d) Support the functioning of a formally constituted National Political Parties Forum. e) Develop and adopt a national ethics policy. f) Intensify prevention and combating corruption, particularly in the political parties’ eco system, to ensure the integrity of the leadership of the country. g) To ensure institutionalization of public service performance management and reporting system. h) To ensure state and non-state actors’ effective participation in anti-corruption and integrity measures. Competitive Economy and Inclusive growth a) The country should aim at achieving a Technology-driven Economy in all sectors with extensive application of ICT and Artificial Intelligence in almost all sectors. b) Continue to invest in hard (e.g., power, railways, maritime) and soft (e.g., optic fiber network) infrastructure. c) Strengthen land administration, including land use planning, surveys, and titling. d) Prioritize public and private investment in sectors with a high propensity to create and propel job creation, in particular agriculture. e) Expand investment financing of public banks, ensuring they are adequately capitalized. f) Hasten the establishment of special economic zones in each region. g) Identify new and dynamic sectors that have emerged recently and have huge potential to grow and transform the lives of many citizens. Examples of these sectors are the creative industry (such as sports, music, and film) and the blue economy. xxxii | Page Climate Change and Sustainable Environment a) Capacity building of existing institutions in human resources to deal with the causes and impacts of climate change (CC). b) Provide adequate financial resources to respective institutions for CC adaptation and mitigation measures. c) Enhance support for promoting sustainable use of natural resources. d) Promote the use of low-carbon energy sources (e.g., natural gas), alternative energy (e.g., wind and solar) and renewable energies (e.g., hydropower, bioenergy). e) Promote investments in sustainable waste management, especially in urban areas. Green Economic Growth Prepare and adopt a national green growth policy and strategy. A concept note on the same was prepared in 2019 by ESRF for the Ministry of Agriculture. Blue Economy Development To prepare and adopt a national blue economic growth policy and strategy that supports a similar one already prepared by the Revolutionary Government of Zanzibar. Digital Transformation a) Capacity building in digital transformation (IT application, artificial intelligence, cloud computing, internet of things, robotics, edge computing, social media platforms). b) Investment in last-mile connectivity of the national ICT broadband backbone optic fiber network. c) Promote connectivity to the national ICT broadband backbone network. d) Promote local production of ICT hardware and software. e) Invest in community-based ICT facilities/kiosks. f) Investment in cyber security. Optimizing Tanzania’s Strategic Geographical Location The country is strategically positioned as a gateway for more than 8 countries in Eastern, Central and Southern Africa. Continued and concerted efforts will have to be made to xxxiii | Page improve service delivery to those countries in handling their imports, exports, and passenger travel. Smart investments are required in the following areas: a) Modernized sea/lake ports and airports with facilities to handle all types of goods. b) Modernised and safe railways and road networks. c) Modernized sea vessels and train wagons. d) Capacity building of smart logistics services companies. e) ICT investments for efficient communication and electronic cargo tracking. f) Simplification of movement of persons from neighbouring countries engaged in transport logistics. Implementation a) Establish a robust Communication and Dissemination Strategy and Action Plan to ensure that TDV2050 is understood and owned by all stakeholders in society. This is important to avoid the shortfalls in TDV2025 whereby a third of the interviewed sample of stakeholders indicated to have heard for the first time some 15 or more years after it was launched. b) Ensure that the process of evaluation, monitoring and learning is used to track down progress towards the realization of the Vision goals. This will require the development of specific performance benchmarks and measurable outputs to assist in monitoring the process of implementing the Development Vision goals. Review the Development Vision every five years to gauge how the nation is faring and what adjustments need to be made as part of a regular evaluation and monitoring exercise. xxxiv | Page PART ONE 1.0 1.1 INTRODUCTION AND OBJECTIVES Introduction The Tanzania Development Vision (TDV) 2025 was unveiled in 2000, thereby marking an implementation period of about 23 years to date. The Vision had set clear issues that the country aspires to attain socially, economically and politically over the period up to June 2025, with the thrust of ensuring that Tanzania graduates from the group of least developed and low-income countries into a middle-income (MIC) group of countries, with per capita income of around USD 3,000 by 2025 and distinguishing itself with five (5) core attributes, in particular (i) high quality of livelihood (ii) peace, stability and unity (iii) good governance (iv) a well-educated and learning society; and (v) a semi-industrialized and competitive economy that is capable of producing sustainable and broadly shared benefits. These attributes of TDV 2025 are translated in the following key performance indicators, namely life expectancy of 68 years at birth, Human Development Index (HDI) of 0.65, the infant mortality rate of below 20 per 1000 live births, universal primary education, and secondary school enrolment ratio of above 60 percent, as well as access to safe water for urban and rural dwellers of about 90 percent. The vision also outlines the existence of challenges and what was supposed to be achieved considering five main dimensions of sustainable human development: social and economic progress, political development, institutional dimensions, technological dimensions, and environmental sustainability. Following an extended period of implementing transitional, short-term economic and structural reforms in the mid-1980s, there was a general national consensus that Tanzania lacked a development framework (vision) for guiding and mobilizing the citizens, particularly after the phasing out of the Arusha Declaration development philosophy. Hence, it was considered necessary to formulate a new economic and social development vision for the country, a vision that could guide national development efforts. Consequently, TDV 2025 was prepared following a need to have a long-term development philosophy to sustain its course. Subsequently, in 1995, the government appointed a group of cross-sectional experts and advisors to formulate TDV 2025, which was completed in 1999 after comprehensive consultations with key stakeholders at the national and regional levels. The desired attributes are structured for systematic implementation under three main goals, each with several target areas. The first goal is to attain a high quality of livelihood, with about nine target areas; the second goal is to attain good governance and has four target areas, while goal three for building a strong and competitive economy has four target areas. The below-mentioned broad goals and their specified target areas were elaborated in 2000 in the Composite Development Goal (CDG) for the TDV 2025. The CDG for TDV 2025 listed five multi-dimensional goals touching on (i) social and economic progress, (ii) political development, (iii) institutional dimensions, (iv) technological development, and (v) environmental sustainability. 1 | Page 1.2 Objectives The main objective of this assignment is to evaluate the TDV 2025 implementation, governing institutions, and its instruments to identify progress made, achievements attained, lessons learnt, and challenges experienced and make recommendations towards the formulation of a new Tanzania Development Vision (TDV 2050). Specific objectives are: a) Undertake an evidence-based assessment of progress made so far in achieving TDV 2025 goals and targets, including the identification of goals and targets unlikely to be achieved by 2025. Document the lessons and challenges and make recommendations on the same. b) Identify policy, legal, regulatory, structural, and institutional factors behind success and challenges in achieving TDV 2025 goals and targets. c) Assess the relevance, efficacy and sustainability of major strategies and interventions adopted during TDV 2025 implementation. d) Review resource mobilization, availability, and management in the execution of TDV 2025. e) Identify and map out the impact of domestic political, socio-economic, and demographic dynamics during the implementation of TDV 2025. f) Identify and map out the impact of regional and global dynamics of international trade, investments, risk contagion and security during the implementation of TDV 2025. g) Propose policy recommendations and lessons learnt for the formulation of the new Vision, including key drivers and areas of focus. 1.3 Scope of Work The scope of the evaluation covers Tanzania, both mainland and Zanzibar. It involves the whole period from the year 2000 to 2025 (precisely making use of actual data/information until 2022 and estimation of achievement expectations for the remaining three years between 2023 and 2025). The evaluation focuses on the level of attainment of TDV 2025’s objectives and targets, covering all performance indicators for the vision’s five attributes, namely: a) High-quality livelihood. b) Peace, stability, and unity. c) Good governance. d) A well-educated and learning society, and 2 | Page e) Strong and competitive economy. Additionally, the evaluation covers TDV 2025 implementing instruments (including Long Term Perspective Plan 2011/12–2025/26, medium-term national development plans such as National Strategy for Growth and Poverty Reduction or MKUKUTA and Five-Year Development Plans), as well as governing institutions. 1.4 Expected Deliverables a) An inception report: Detailed deliverables (expected results and risks) - Implementation schedule. - Detailed methodology, including the appended survey tools and the preliminary observations. b) Interim report - Methodology and approach used in the field. - Data collection. - Data analysis. - Preliminary findings of the evaluation of the TDV 2025 (achievements or strengths, weaknesses, challenges and constraints, and comprehensive set of recommendations and inputs to be used during the formulation of TDV 2050). c) The First Draft Report (English) - Numerous impacts, Outcomes, and outputs are viewed as accomplishments, lessons learned, and difficulties. - Methodology and approach used in the field. - Comprehensive report on the evaluation of the TDV 2025 (achievements or strengths, weaknesses, challenges and constraints, and comprehensive set of recommendations and inputs to be used during the formulation of TDV 2050). d) Final reports (Final findings of the study include various impacts, outcomes and outputs regarded as achievements, lessons learnt, and challenges. - Methodology and approach used in the field. - Comprehensive report on the evaluation of the TDV 2025 (achievements or strengths, weaknesses, challenges and constraints, and comprehensive set of recommendations and inputs to be used during the formulation of TDV 2050). e) Two (2) policy briefs (English and Swahili) - Citizen’s policy brief. - National policy makers’ brief. 3 | Page PART TWO 2.0 2.1 APPROACH AND METHODOLOGY The General Approach In the course of undertaking the evaluation, the consultant used a broad-based approach in soliciting evidence of the progress and achievements made in implementing the Vision based on the set goals and targets, identifying constraints and gaps, and lessons for the following Vision 2050. Primary information was obtained from different categories of stakeholders at different levels, using individual and group dialogues and interviews. A secondary type of information, which was obtained from administrative and technical reports, provided quantifiable evidence through data and observations recorded over the past 22 years. The primary and secondary information collected allows a combination of qualitative and quantitative analysis and presentation of the evaluation. 2.2 Methodology 2.2.1 Sampling Procedure The team consulted stakeholders from seven geographical zones of Tanzania and Zanzibar, namely: Lake zone (Mwanza, Mara, Geita, Shinyanga, Simiyu and Kagera); Northern zone (Arusha, Kilimanjaro, and Manyara); Southern highlands zone (Iringa, Njombe, Mbeya, Rukwa, and Songwe); Western zone (Katavi, Kigoma and Tabora); Coastal zone (Dar es Salaam, Morogoro, Tanga and Zanzibar); Central zone (Singida and Dodoma) and Southern Zone (Mtwara, Lindi and Ruvuma). Table 2.1 provides a summary of stakeholders’ consultation plans. A stratified sample of 18 out of the 26 administrative regions in Tanzania Mainland and 2 regions in Zanzibar were purposefully selected from different geographical zones by using a combination of criteria such as urbanization pressure and potential for industrialization (Dar es Salaam, Pwani, Songwe, Arusha and Mwanza), policymakers presence (Dodoma), potential for food production as a grain basket for the country and the SADC/COMESA region (Rukwa and Morogoro), high level of poverty and poor infrastructure (Lindi), potential for a diversified economic base and value addition of agricultural produce (Morogoro), water resource/blue economy and mineral richness and bordering EAC partners states (Mwanza, Mara, Tanga and Zanzibar) to mention but a few as shown in Table 1. Table 1: Selected Zones/Regions for Stakeholder Consultations Zones Lake zone Criteria Urbanization, minerals, export crops and gateway to the EAC market by road and water. Regions for FGD and KIIs Mwanza, Kagera, and Mara. Regions for RTFs/ Workshops Mwanza (Hosting region). Other regions are Simiyu and Shinyanga. 4 | Page 5 | Page Zones Criteria Regions for FGD and KIIs Regions for RTFs/ Workshops Central zone Policymakers with sector ministries departments and agencies, parliamentarians, livestock keeping and edible oil production. Dodoma and Singida. Dodoma (Hosting region). Southern Highland zone Food secure, border region, high concentration of non-foods cash crops, developed infrastructure connecting with SADC market through Mtwara Corridor and TAZARA corridor. Rukwa, Iringa, Songwe. Mbeya (Hosting region) Other regions are Njombe and Songwe. Coastal Zone Historically with low density of road and electricity physical infrastructure, historically poverty-stricken, blue economy activities (Zanzibar), one border region (Mtwara); potential for a natural gas driven economy; a gateway for the Mtwara Development Corridor connecting with SADC countries. Dar es Salaam, Morogoro and Pwani. Dar es Salaam (Hosting region) Northern zone Urbanization, tourism, high incomes, diversified economy, high costs of living, border regions connecting with the EAC partner states, and political development. Arusha and Kilimanjaro. Arusha (Hosting region) Another region is Kilimanjaro. Western zone Border region, food secure, underdeveloped, historically recipient of refugees from insecure neighboring countries on its western side. Kigoma and Katavi. Tabora (Hosting Region) Other regions are Kigoma and Katavi. Southern Zone Border region, food secure, underdeveloped; blue economy; non-food crops (cashew nuts); connects with SADC market through Mtwara corridor; natural gas potential; Dangote Cement factory. Mtwara, Lindi and Ruvuma. Mtwara (Hosting Region) Other regions are Lindi and Ruvuma. Zanzibar Blue economy, beach/heritage tourism and Spices production Pemba and Unguja Coastal workshop in DSM. Total 20 Source: Consultant’s Compilation, 2023 2.2.2 Data Collection Techniques a) Key Informant Interviews To get feedback from stakeholders in 18 selected regions in the mainland and two regions in Zanzibar (2 0 regions in total), the consultants conducted Key Informants Interviews (KIIs) with various stakeholders (10 people per region). A special interview guide with structured questionnaires was used. Key informants included government officials from the selected district/region, such as heads of key departments (e.g., industry and trade, infrastructure, agriculture, livestock, planning, health, and education), private sector representatives, political leaders, retired officers, civil society representatives, (professional bodies, trade unions, Community-Based Organizations (CBOs) and Faith-Based Organizations (FBOs) and development partners. b) Focus Group Discussions (FGDs) The consultant conducted two focused group discussions (FGDs) of 8 to 15 participants per FGD in the selected LGAs. The feedback was sought from representatives of different sectors/occupations ranging from production (farmers and livestock keepers), processors, transporters, small-scale miners, fishermen, petty traders, political leaders, religious leaders, and traditional leaders to understand the impact of different sectoral interventions targeting communities at lower levels. However, the consultant was cautious enough to ensure that dominant sectors relevant to each respective region were given appropriate weight during the selection of FGD participants. c) Round Table Fora (RTF)/Workshops Round table fora/workshops were organized at zonal levels. RTF workshops were intended to draw experts with relevant and proper expertise to brainstorm on various issues (particularly on the strengths and weaknesses of the developmental instruments used by the government for the past 22 years. It was planned that one forum be conducted in each of the seven zonal centers. At least 30 participants were involved in 7 of the RTFs, bringing a total of about 210 stakeholders. RTF/workshops included government officials, Ministries, Departments, and Agencies (MDAs) from the selected regions, such as heads of key departments (industry and trade, infrastructure, agriculture, livestock, planning, health, and education), private sector representatives, political leaders, civil society representatives (including professional bodies, trade unions, etc.) and development partners. d) Document/Literature Review A comprehensive literature review was undertaken to draw lessons from domestic and international experiences with respect to the implementation of TDV 2025 and other countries’ development visions. The literature review provided some specific lessons from different national and sector-based strategies, approaches, and programs which Tanzania has so far adopted and implemented. The literature included government documents (such as sector policies, strategies, plans and programs) and other national and international studies relevant to this task. The list of reviewed documents is presented in Annex 2 of this report. 6 | Page 7 | Page 2.2.3 Samples Size Plan Implementation The sample plan implementation was satisfactory. As presented in Table 2, the evaluation team managed to reach all regions as planned. A total of 235 KIIs were administered against the planned 229; 45 FGDs with a total of 601 participants were conducted against the target of 45 FGDs with 675 participants; 7 zonal stakeholders’ workshops were conducted, and one special workshop in Dodoma for MDAs, bringing a total of 210 participants. The initial plan was to hold seven workshops with a planned number of 263 participants. The complete list of study participants is presented in Annex 3. Table 2: Sample size and implementation S/N Region KIIs FGDs Zonal Workshop Planned Actual Planned Actual Planned Actual 1 Mbeya 10 09 2 (30) 2 (24) 30 19 2 Iringa 10 12 2 (30) 2 (26) N/A N/A 3 Ruvuma 10 10 2 (30) 2 (29) N/A N/A 4 Lindi 10 10 2 (30) 2 (28) N/A N/A 5 Mtwara 10 10 2 (30) 2 (34) 30 28 6 Kigoma 10 10 2 (30) 2 (30) N/A N/A 7 Tabora 10 10 2 (30) 2 (21) 30 28 8. Morogoro 10 10 2 (30) 2 (31) N/A N/A 9 Singida 10 10 2 (30) 2 (22) N/A N/A 10 Dodoma 10 10 2 (30) 2 (22) 50 40 11 Kagera 10 09 2(30) 2(19) N/A N/A 12 Mara 10 10 2(30) 2(19) N/A N/A 13 Mwanza 10 10 2(30) 2(23) 30 28 14 Songwe 10 10 2(30) 2(30) N/A N/A 15 Rukwa 10 10 2(30) 2(23) N/A N/A 16 Kilimanjaro 10 15 2(30) 2(15) N/A N/A 17 Arusha 10 19 2(30) 2(39) 30 42 18 Dar-es-Salaam 25 20 5(75) 5(75) 30 0 19 Pwani 14 12 2(30) 2(28) N/A N/A 20 Zanzibar 20 19 4(60) 4(63) N/A N/A 21 Dodoma* - - - - 33 25 TOTAL 229 235 45 (675) 45(601) 263 210 Source: Field data, 2023 *Special consultative workshop for MDAs 2.2.4 Data Entry and Analysis Both quantitative and qualitative information informed this evaluation study. Data entry and analysis for qualitative data employed DEDOOSE, a qualitative data analysis software that is commonly used for analyzing textual and audio-visual data. All qualitative data collected from the field were imported into the project. This was followed by codebook creation that defined the codes and categories that were used for data analysis. The coding process involved applying codes to relevant sections of text data by highlighting and tagging text segments with codes from the created codebook. Finally, various visualized outputs were generated to reflect the coded data. Quantitative data was run through Excel, and analysis tables were developed. 8 | Page PART THREE 3.0 3.1 MAIN FINDINGS- ACHIEVEMENTS AND CHALLENGES An Overview As explained in part two on the methodology used to review TDV2025, the evidence on achievements made during the past 22 years of its implementation, as well as challenges encountered, were obtained from a combination of firsthand views by stakeholders and the analysis of secondary data. In this report, the presentation of stakeholder views is limited to those provided by key informants in different parts of the country. There are also limited results from the analysis of views provided by stakeholders through focus group discussions, but also exclude views from the Diaspora community, whose analysis is ongoing and will be incorporated in the next draft report. We believe what has been presented reflects an accurate picture of what Tanzanians perceive about the successes, challenges, and what should be the focus for the next phase of the Tanzania Development Vision 2050. Views from key informants indicated the topmost impressive areas when they heard about TDV2025 for the first time were the resolve to provide universal primary education (15%), improved access to primary health care (14.3%), improved infrastructure (9.1%) with specific mention of electricity (4.3%), universal access to clean water (7.3%), and improved governance (7%), singling out its impact on peace and stability (6.4%) (Figure 1). Figure 1: Scores (%) of most impressive issues in TDV2025 when heard for the first time (N=187) Source: This Study’s Field data, 2023 9 | Page 3.2 Goal 1: Attaining High-Quality Livelihood This goal was designed to improve the livelihoods of Tanzanians to be comparable to citizens in middle-income countries by 2025 by ensuring that each household is food secure and universal access to primary education (raising the gross enrolment rate from 76 percent in 2000 to 100 percent in 2025), there is gender equity where women have an equal say in the society, universal access to basic health services reducing the average distance to health facilities from 5 km to a radius of one kilometer, with particular emphasis to reduce maternal and child mortality rates, there is universal access to clean and safe water within 400 meters distance from 46 percent in rural areas and 68 percent in urban areas to 85 percent and 95 percent, respectively, by 2025. It was also envisaged to increase life expectancy from 50 years to 68 years, and few or no households living in abject poverty, and raise the score of the Human Development Index (HDI) from 0.421 in 1999 to 0.65 by 2025. Stakeholders’ opinions on the nine targets under the goal of improved livelihoods suggested that overall, the top five most impressively performed were education (23.6%), primary health care (21.6%), food security and nutrition (10.7%), water supply (9.8%), and gender equity (9.8%) (Figure 2). Figure 2: Stakeholder scores (%) of the most impressively performed target areas under the goal of improved livelihoods (N=187) Source: This Study’s Field data, 2023 The analysis based on secondary data, with occasional stakeholder views provided of the nine areas, is summarized below. 3.2.1 Target 1: Food secure society with reduced malnutrition This target has two interrelated dimensions: first is to ensure that there is adequate food, and every household has access to food; second, equal importance is that food translates to a well-nourished population. This implies that citizens should be able to access sufficient and nutritious food. Evidence suggests that the food self-sufficiency ratio increased from less than 100 percent in the 1990s to between 115 and 120 percent in recent years. 10 | Page According to the Integrated Food Security Phase Classification (IPC, 2023),3 food insecurity is mainly driven by prolonged dry spells and erratic rainfall leading to crop failure. Districts that are usually more prone to food insecurity include Hai, Longido, Monduli, Mwanga, and Same. Despite the mapping of some famine-prone areas, as shown on Map 1, it is now rare to get reports of district-wide cases of famine. This success is attributed to different approaches supported by the government, including encouraging the private sector to adopt good agricultural practices, mainly using improved seeds and partially subsidized fertilizers. The private sector has been supported by policies that encouraged traders to buy food from surplus areas to take to different parts of the country where there is demand for the commodities. The area under public-funded irrigation schemes also almost doubled over the past 15 years. Combined public and private sector investments in warehouses, park houses, and cold chain facilities resulted in a reduction of food post-harvest losses. Map 1: Districts in Tanzania Mainland Suffering from Regular Food Insecurity Source: IPC (2023). When it comes to nutritional status, there has been some progress in reducing levels of malnutrition among (i) adults in general, which is exemplified by a decline in nutritional anemia among pregnant women from 80 percent in 2000 to 45 percent in 2016, and (ii) children under five years, whereby stunting declined from 48.3 percent in 1999 to 30 percent in 2022 (Figure 3). 3 IPC (2023). IPC Acute Food Insecurity Analysis: October 2022 to May 2023. Report prepared by the Integrated Food Security Phase Classification (IPC). 11 | Page Figure 3: Trend in Wasting, Underweight and Stunting Children Source: URT (2019). Final Tanzania National Nutrition Survey_July2019.indd (unicef.org) for 1999 to 2018; and TFNC (2023). Demographic and Health Survey and Malaria Indicator Survey 2022. Key Indicators for the year 2022. The observed achievements were driven by coordinated national programs on maternal and child health conducted by the central government and supported by local government authorities (LGAs) and development partners such as the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF). It includes closely monitoring pre-and post-natal development of mothers and infants until 5 years old (see targets 5 and 6 below). There is also a requirement for micronutrient fortification of maize and wheat flour, including producing iodized salt. 3.2.2 Target 2: Universal Primary Education Provided The goal is to ensure equitable access to quality primary education for boys and girls at both pre-primary and primary levels. Increasing access to universal primary education is crucial to ensure a sustainable increase in literacy rates in the country. By ensuring that all children can attend primary school, there is a greater likelihood of improving overall literacy levels. Enrollment Rate of School-Age Children Pre-Primary Education The data shows a consistent rise in enrollment at the pre-primary level for children aged 3 to 6 years. Figure 4 demonstrates this upward trend, with gross enrollment climbing from 28 to 84 percent over a span of approximately 15 years. The government set an ambitious target of achieving a 100 percent enrollment rate, as stipulated in the FYDP III for the period 2021/22 to 2025/26. As of the latest data in 2022/23, the enrollment rate stands at around 84 percent, showing that the country is on course to meet its targets. Nevertheless, efforts are needed to maintain and enhance this enrollment rate. 12 | Page 13 | Page Figure 4: Pre-Primary Enrolment in Tanzania (% of gross) Source: World Bank (2023) (data.worldbank.org/indicator/…./locations=Tanzania) According to the Ministry of Education Science and Technology (MoEST) data, a total of 1,543,843 children were enrolled in pre-primary school in 2022, with around 51 percent being boys and 49 percent being girls. Most of these pupils are aged 3 to 5 years, with those over five years old accounting for 38 percent of all enrolled students, the majority of whom are boys. Moreover, evidence shows that overall, there has been an increase in the number of children with special needs or disabilities enrolled into pre-primary schools since 2009. The GOT has successfully increased access to education for pupils with disabilities. Table 3 shows that, for instance, mentally impaired pupils increased from 448 in 2009 to 964 in 2017. The achievements were due to the government's intentions to increase awareness of special needs/disability and their rights, improve access to education, hence giving opportunities to such pupils to be educated, as well as the progress of disability inclusion initiatives. Table 3: Enrolment of pupils with disabilities in pre-primary schools, by type of disability and sex, 2009 - 2017 Source: BEST (Basic Education Statistical Abstract) 2014-2017. 14 | Page Primary Education Enrolment The GER and NER targets for the country stand at 100 percent (MoF,2021). Table 4 shows that the country has made significant progress in increasing primary education enrolment for school-age children over the past 20 years. For instance, total GER increased from 69 percent in 2000 to 97 percent in 2022. Also, the NER increased from 54 percent in 2000 to 88 percent in 2015 (Table 3.2). Table 4: GER and NER, 2000 – 2022 Intervention Outcome Areas (indicator if in Number or Percentage achievement) Target set for 2025. (source FYDP 21/22 25/26) Status in 2000 Status in 2005 Status in 2010 Benchmark in 2015/16 Status in 2020/21 Status in 2022/23 Approximat ed status in 2025 (use color codes: green=abo ve 90%, etc.)) Data source 1 Primary enrollment rates, total (% gross) 100 69 105 103 85 97 97 https://data.worldban k.org/indicator/SE.P RM.ENRR?locations =TZ 2 Primary enrollment rates, male (% gross) 100 69 107 102 82 95 https://data.worldban k.org/indicator/SE.P RM.ENRR.MA?locati ons=TZ 3 Primary enrollment rates, female (% gross) 100 69 104 104 87 98 https://data.worldban k.org/indicator/SE.P RM.ENRR.FE?locati ons=TZ 4 Primary school net enrollment rates, total (% of primary school age children/gross) 100 54 91 93 87.8 95.7 https://data.worldban k.org/indicator/SE.P RM.TENR?locations =TZ 5 Primary school net enrollment rates, male (% of primary school age children/gross) 100 53 92 92 https://data.worldban k.org/indicator/SE.P RM.TENR.MA?locati ons=TZ Intervention Outcome Areas (indicator if in Number or Percentage achievement) Target set for 2025. (source FYDP 21/22 25/26) Status in 2000 Status in 2005 Status in 2010 Benchmark in 2015/16 Status in 2020/21 Status in 2022/23 Approximat ed status in 2025 (use color codes: green=abo ve 90%, etc.)) Data source 6 Primary school net enrollment rates, female (% of primary school age children/gross) 100 54 90 94 https://data.worldban k.org/indicator/SE.P RM.TENR.FE?locati ons=TZ Source: World Bank (2023) (data.worldbank.org/indicator/…. /locations-Tanzania) The increase for both GER and NER had been sharp from 2000 to 2005 – 2010, then the rates decreased slowly, 97 percent and 88 percent, respectively. Such a trend is attributed to the enrolment increase not being able to keep up with the growing school-age population, as well as an increase in the number of primary school children who are outside the official age range (mostly older than 13 years). Hence, the GOT introduced the Education and Training Policy 2014, which expanded the entrance age to Pre-Primary education from a fixed 5 years to a flexible 3 to 5 years and to Primary education from a fixed seven years to a flexible 4 to 6 years. Zanzibar, on the other hand, appears to have done even better by achieving a GER of 118 percent, which is above the average for LMICs. The table also shows that there is a gender gap in enrollment rates, with girls being slightly less likely to be enrolled than boys. However, the gap has been narrowing over time, and it is expected that the target of 100 percent enrollment for both boys and girls will be met by 2025. This shows Tanzania is on track to achieve SDG target 4.2 (ensure that all girls and boys complete free, equitable and quality primary and secondary education leading to relevant and effective learning outcomes) and SDG target 4.5 (by 2030, eliminate gender disparities in education and ensure equal access to all levels of education and vocational training for the vulnerable, including persons with disabilities, indigenous peoples, and children in vulnerable situations). However, more efforts are needed to increase the NER. During stakeholder consultations in Tarime Municipal Council (MC), a Member of Parliament (MP) attested that ‘Fee-free primary education has increased enrolment leading to shortage of classrooms. Years back, school-age kids were loitering in the streets, but now more attend schools. – after Standard 7, many students were getting married; but now this has changed.’ These sentiments were more-or-less supported by other leaders, such as the Mayor of Musoma MC, who acknowledged that the Government was “…constructing new classrooms and renovating old classrooms, the government is giving us teachers…and hence the pass rate has increased”. Likewise, a Sheikh from Muleba, DC, said, “Primary education has improved. Fee-free education has facilitated this. Even those in poverty can enroll, unlike the way it used to be before”. Even with these achievements, room for improvements (and challenges), especially about the availability and quality of teachers, have been noted by most stakeholders. For example, a politician from Bukoba, DC, said, 15 | Page 16 | Page “Universal primary education has done well though not 100 percent. We have facilities, books, desks—you can see things but need teachers and improving their conditions”. Table 5: Primary Education Performance Indicators Intervention Outcome Areas (indicator if in Number or Percentage achievement) Target set for 2025. (source FYDP 21/22 25/26) Status in 2000 Status in 2005 Status in 2010 Benchmark in 2015/16 Status in 2020/21 Status in 2022/23 Approxi mated status in 2025 Data source 1 Percentage of cohort passing the examination (PSLE) 90 22 67.5 57 80 2 Pupils/Teacher ratio 30:1 56:1 51:1 43:1 37:1 3 Trained teachers in primary education (% of total teachers) 86 86 https://data.world bank.org/indicator /SE.PRM.TCAQ.Z S 4 Pupils/Textbooks ratio 1:1 20:1 3:1 3:1 1:1 1:2 https://www.un.or g/en/collection/93 6/6479 MoEST 2022 raw data 5 Pupils/Classroom ratio 40:1 75:1 50:1 6 Pupils/Latrine ratio (Boys) 25:1 56:1 25:1 7 Pupils/Latrine ratio (Girls) 25:1 58:1 20:1 8 Pupils/desk ratio 3:1 4:1 3:1 9 Proportion of schools with clean water 60 40 10 Proportion of schools with electricity 50 18.3 30 17 | Page Intervention Outcome Areas (indicator if in Number or Percentage achievement) Target set for 2025. (source FYDP 21/22 25/26) Status in 2000 Status in 2005 Status in 2010 Benchmark in 2015/16 Status in 2020/21 Status in 2022/23 Approxi mated status in 2025 Data source 11 Transition rate from Standard VII to Form I 90 20.3 49.3 52.2 55.5 70 https://www.tamis emi.go.tz/storage/ app/media/upload ed files/BEMIS_ABS TRACT%202017 %20-%2008-05 2018.pdf 12 Primary school completion rate, total (% of relevant age group) 51 55 91 65 69 https://data.world bank.org/indicator /SE.PRM.CMPT. ZS?locations=TZ 13 Primary school completion rate, male (% of relevant age group) 50 56 89 60 66 https://data.world bank.org/indicator /SE.PRM.CMPT. MA.ZS?locations =TZ 14 Primary school completion rate, female (% of relevant age group) 51 54 93 70 72 https://data.world bank.org/indicator /SE.PRM.CMPT. FE.ZS?locations= TZ 15 Persistence to last grade of primary school, total (% of cohort) 74 79 81 (2009) 79 (2019) https://data.world bank.org/indicator /SE.PRM.PRSL.Z S?locations=TZ 16 Persistence to last grade of primary school, male (% of cohort) 71 78 76 (2009) 75 (2019) https://data.world bank.org/indicator /SE.PRM.PRSL. MA.ZS?locations =TZ 17 Persistence to last grade of primary school, female (% of cohort) 77 81 87 (2009) 83 (2019) https://data.world bank.org/indicator /SE.PRM.PRSL.F E.ZS?locations=T Z 18 Education spending (% of GDP) 18.14 19.8 17.63 13.63 14.33 https://www.macr otrends.net/countr ies/TZA/tanzania/ education spending Source: World Bank (2023) (data.worldbank.org/indicator/…./locations=Tanzania) Completion rate: The percentage of children completing primary school in Tanzania has improved over the past 20 years. In the year 2020, 69 percent of pupils completed primary school, with girls having a higher completion rate than boys (72% versus 66%), which is an improvement compared to the year 2000 when the overall completion rate was at 51 percent. The persistence to the last grade of primary school has also shown a slow upward trend over the years, with girls having a higher persistence rate than boys. Transition to Secondary School Education In 2000, about 22 percent of students passed the Primary School Leaving Examination (PSLE). The rate was increased to 80 percent by 2020. However, more students pass Kiswahili than Mathematics or English, and the pass rate varies by region. These disparities need to be addressed by providing adequate training materials and more training to teachers on how to teach subjects with low pass rates, such as mathematics, and addressing the disparities in the PSLE pass rate by providing more resources to schools in disadvantaged areas, thus ensuring that all students in pass the PSLE and continue their education. The transition rate from Standard VII to Form I have improved significantly over the years, from 20 percent in 2000 to 70 percent in 2020. This upward trend can be attributed to the implementation of a fee-free initiative, which minimized financial barriers for students, especially from poor households, and the construction of classrooms, which enhanced the educational infrastructure. As a result, more students are enrolling in schools and staying in the education system, ultimately leading to higher transition rates. Figure 5: Education spending as % of GDP Source: Macrotrends (2023): Tanzania/education spending. The pupil/teacher ratio (PRT) improved from 56:1 in 2005 to the current 37:1, which is not very high compared to the target of 30:1 by 2025 and the ideal standard PTR of 25:1 for pre primary education and 45:1 for primary education. However, the achieved ratio could be more meaningfully impacted by increasing the proportion of trained teachers with relevant qualifications, which in 2020 was 86 percent of the total number of teachers. 18 | Page The pupil/textbook ratio has significantly improved over the past 20 years and now stands at 1:2, compared to 20:1 in 2000 (Table 4) (ESRF,2007). The improvement can be attributed to an effective procurement system in the government, which ensures that teachers do not hoard books for fear of damage or future shortages and that pupils have equitable access to learning materials. Figure 5 illustrates the trend of education spending in Tanzania spanning from 1996 to 2022, expressed as a percentage of GDP, which indicates that the portion of GDP allocated to education has displayed significant fluctuations over the years. For instance, in 1998, education spending rose dramatically from 11.8 percent of GDP to 19.5 percent of GDP by 2004. However, it subsequently experienced a slight decline to 15 percent of GDP in 2006, followed by another increase to 24.4 percent of GDP in 2017. Subsequently, it decreased to 13.6 percent by 2020. 3.2.3. Target 3: Gender Equality and Empowerment Tanzania’s 2022 National Population Census report revealed that there are more women than men in the country by about one percentage point, just like it has been in previous reports. However, there are observed gender disparities in various aspects of life, such as access to tertiary level of education, whereby women still face barriers to transit from high school to colleges and universities. As shown in Figure 6 presents data on the number of female and male students enrolled in these three education levels from 1970 to 2023. Until 2010, the figure shows that the number of male students enrolled exceeded that of female students across all three education levels. However, a significant shift occurred in the subsequent years. However, the situation primary and secondary education enrolment changed from 2015 when female students started to exceed male students (see Figure 6, panels A and B). Increased budgetary allocation to the education sector and the fee-free education system for primary and secondary schools contributed to this trend. Policy initiatives and interventions could focus on promoting equal opportunities for female students in tertiary education, addressing potential barriers that contribute to the enrollment gap. The ongoing efforts by the government through the Ministry of Education, Science, and Technology to grant scholarship awards to female applicants in higher education levels demonstrate a commendable initial move in narrowing the gender disparity in higher education. This proactive approach aims to boost female involvement in higher education, tackling potential obstacles and promoting increased gender equality in advanced academic pursuits. Figure 6: Progress in Enrolment of Girls in Primary, Secondary and Tertiary Education in Tanzania (1970 – 2022) Source: UNESCO 19 | Page 20 | Page In leadership women are underrepresented in decision-making roles. In the job market they are subjected to gender-based discrimination during recruitment and in the workplace. At the family level they are denied equal rights to possession of productive assets such as land. It is customary for women to be responsible for childcare and other household tasks in the family; this limits their ability, and sometimes willingness, to participate in the workforce. Significant disparities exist in the distribution of women and men in leadership and decision making roles. Despite the 2022 population census indicating a slightly higher female population in the country, women’s participation and representation in crucial leadership positions, governance structures, and decision-making organs remain lower compared to men. The historical data on the proportion of women occupying leadership roles in Tanzania illustrates a prevailing dominance of men in such positions. Nonetheless, there has been a gradual increase in the proportion of women in such positions in consequent years, as evidenced by Figure 7, Table 6 and Table 7, although it still remains lower than that of men. Table 6 Representation Numbers in Key Decision-Making Positions in Tanzania, 2004–2014 2004 - 2005 2013 - 2014 Position Number Number Women Men Women Men Minister 4 23 10 22 Deputy Minister 5 12 6 19 Member of Parliament 62 226 126 224 Permanent Secretary 7 18 4 18 Deputy Permanent Secretary 1 7 11 16 Director 29 83 51 114 Assistant director 49 145 132 225 Commissioner - - 5 14 Assistant Commissioner - - 2 3 Regional Commissioner 2 19 7 18 Regional Administrative Secretary (RAS) 4 17 10 15 District Commissioner 20 87 53 91 District Executive Director (DED) 14 86 33 101 District Administrator 23 86 32 49 Ambassador 2 34 12 36 Judge 13 25 24 43 Heads of Department – Local Council - - 114 526 TOTAL 235 868 632 1534 Source: Women and Men booklet 2017 Table 6 compares the number of men and women in government positions in Tanzania between 2004-2005 and 2013-2014. The overall trend is that the proportion of women in government positions has increased over time. In 2004-2005, women held 22 percent of ministerial positions, 29 percent of deputy ministerial positions, and 22 percent of parliamentary seats. By 2013-2014, women held about 31 percent of ministerial positions, 24 percent of deputy ministerial positions, and 36 percent of parliamentary seats. There are some notable exceptions to this trend. For example, the proportion of women in permanent secretary positions has declined from 28 percent in 2004-2005 to 18 percent in 2013-2014. Moreover, the number of women in other leadership position increase in the consequent time period, however the overall proportion when compared to men is still low. There has also been a substantial improvement in the representation of women in the legislative body of the country (Figure 7). To quote a retired civil servant from Tarime MC, “Gender equality has done well because now women are more involved…there is even increased attendance of women in public. There are also more women in politics and as members of local government councils. Even in rural areas there are more women who contest for leadership positions. Although women are not as educated as men, they are well sensitized and can compare and compete well with men in leadership”. However, the target set by the UN for women’s representation in parliament is 30 percent, implying that the country is within reach of this target. Some way forward could be improving the legal and policy frameworks to promote gender equality, such as ensuring that political parties have gender quotas. Figure 7: Percent of seats held by women in the National Parliament 1999 – 2022 Source: World Bank (2023) (Open Data) Figure 6 shows that the increase in the percentage of seats held by women in parliament over the past two decades is a positive sign of progress towards gender equality in Tanzania. This achievement can be attributed to the Gender Development policy formulated in the 2000s to promote women’s rights, increase women’s education and participation in the workforce, and probably the role of women’s organizations in raising awareness of gender issues, women's rights advocacy, and professional training. Another action point could be challenging traditional gender stereotypes, for example, education and awareness-raising campaigns. A respondent from Muleba, DC, suggested the use of elderly and influential people to educate others on gender issues. They are quoted saying “Gender equality is also going on well, but traditional values and attitudes have not changed yet. We should use elderly and influential people to mitigate and educate on the importance, as mitigation”. Interview responses from KIIs and FGDs show that there has been some progress in terms of gender equality. Most respondents believe Tanzania has done well in implementing gender equality. The existence of intentional efforts to ‘forgotten’ groups, as they dubbed 21 | Page them, has been encouraging. They have noticed that the government has prioritized lending to women, youth, and people with disabilities (PWD). The only observed drawback with the loans is the unintended use, which fails to repay the loans. This is attributed to the lack of family (husbands) involvement in managing the loans. “We see groups that were forgotten, like women, youth, and PWD whom the government is giving priority. The challenge of loans is that many women use it on unplanned activities, hence loss of repayments…” noted a respondent from Mwanza MC. According to the Country Policy and Institutional Assessment (CPIA), gender equality rating remains relatively low, and there is still a significant proportion of women who believe that a husband is justified in using violence against his wife. This suggests that there may still be challenges and areas where gender equality is not fully realized and that cultural and social norms around gender roles and violence need further attention and transformation. Therefore, efforts to promote gender equality should continue and expand to address persistent disparities and societal attitudes (Table 7). Areas that require more effort to improve gender equity include supporting policies and programs that (a) promote gender equality such as discouraging gender-based violence, providing training for men and women on gender equality, and supporting programs that help women to enter the workforce and to advance their careers; (b) provide opportunities for women’s economic empowerment and enhanced gender equality; (c) encourage women to access and own assets, resources, and services, such as education and training, credit, technology, and inputs; (d) involvement in the labor market with equal pay opportunities (ILFS 2020/21; Idris 2018); (e) discourage women involvement in unpaid domestic and care-work and spend much more time than men working (HBS, 2018)4 implying that women have less time for leisure and personal activities5; (f) encouraging women’s autonomy in making decisions over income, expenditures and some social aspects. For example, there is evidence that only 35 percent of women (aged 15-49) have decision-making power regarding their health care, visiting family and friends, and major household purchases (Demographic and Health Survey [DHS] (2017)); (g) continuing to invest in girl-child education given that female literacy is around 73 percent, compared to male literacy rate is 83 percent (UNESCO 2015; (World Bank World Development Indicators, 2018); and, (h) dealing with social norms that undermine the dignity of women (Newton, 2016)6. Table 7: Gender equality outcome indicators Intervention Outcome Areas (indicator if in Number or Percentage achievement) Data source Target set for 2025 Status in 2000 Status in 2005 Status in 2010 Benchmark in 2015/16 Status in 2020/21 Status in 2022/23 Forecast in 2025 4 5 6 Household Budget Survey 2018 ibid. Making Social Protection Gender Sensitive for Inclusive Development in Sub-Saharan Africa (2016) http://includeplatform.net/wp-content/uploads/2016/01/INCLUDE-GRF-Newton-Making-Social-Protection-Gender Sensitive.pdf 22 | Page 23 | Page 1 CPIA gender equality rating (1=low to 6=high) 4 3.5 3.5 3 https://data.worldbank .org/indicator/IQ.CPA. GNDR.XQ?locations= TZ 2 Women participating in 3 decisions (own health care, major household purchases & visiting family) (% of women aged 15-49) 25.4 30.3 35.2 https://data.worldbank .org/indicator/SG.DM K.ALLD.FN.ZS?locati ons=TZ 3 Proportion of time spent on unpaid domestic & care work, female (% of 24-hour day) 17 (2006) 16 (2014) https://data.worldbank .org/indicator/SG.TIM. UWRK.FE?locations= TZ 4 Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament 16 (1999) 30 31 (2009) 36 (2011) 36 37 37 https://data.worldbank .org/indicator/SG.GE N.PARL.ZS?locations =TZ 5 Women who believe a husband is justified in beating his wife (%) 59.6 53.5 58 https://data.worldbank .org/indicator/SG.VA W.REAS.ZS?location s=TZ Source: World Bank (https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/....?locations=TZ 3.2.4. Target 4: Access to Quality Primary Health Care Primary health care is considered essential for the well-being of a population. In Tanzania, primary health care services are provided by the government, non-governmental organizations (NGOs–mostly faith-based) and the private sector. The long-term target is to achieve 100 percent accessibility to primary health care services within a short walking distance of five kilometers or less. Healthcare expenditure, facilities, and workforce In 2000, the country’s Health Care System consisted of 173 hospitals, 276 health centers and 3,017 dispensaries, of which 49 percent of the hospitals, 97 percent of the health centers, and 81 percent of the dispensaries were public facilities (MFP/NPC, 2000). The number of hospitals has increased by 94 percent to 418 by June 2022, of which 16 percent are found in the Dar es Salaam region, whereas that of health centers has increased to 1,016 and that of dispensaries to 7,447 (Table 8). It is also noteworthy that health expenditure, in absolute terms, has been on the rise due to the expansion of the National Health Insurance Fund (NHIF), which has helped to increase access to healthcare in Tanzania, but at the same, putting a strain on the government’s budget. 24 | Page Table 8: Number of healthcare facilities in Tanzania in 2022 2022 Facility Government FBOs Private Sector Total Hospitals 217 119 82 418 Health Centers 725 162 129 1,016 Dispensaries 5,719 692 1,036 7447 Sub-total 6,661 973 1,247 8,881 Polyclinic 3 32 284 319 Others 17 35 1,716 1,763 Maternity/Nursing homes 1 1 71 73 Total 6,682 1,041 3,318 11,041 Proportion out of total 60.5% 9.4% 30.1% Source: MoF (2022). The Economic Survey, 2022 The government has set a target of boosting health expenditure to 5 percent of GDP by 2030. Government expenditure on health services in 2005 was 6.2 percent of the GDP7 but declined in subsequent years, such that in 2010, it accounted for 3.7 percent of the GDP (Figure 8). There has been a consistent upward trajectory in healthcare spending, increasing from USD 12 per capita in 2000 to USD 39 in 2020. This uptrend in healthcare spending signifies a positive trend, reflecting the government’s commitment to enhancing the well being of its citizens as the population expands. Figure 8: Healthcare spending in Tanzania 2000-2020 Source: Macrotrends (2023) (…Tanzania/Healthcare spending) 7With 2 percent attributed specifically to HIV and AIDS prevention and cure. 25 | Page Table 9: Healthcare Facilities and Workforce Indicators Intervention Outcome Areas (indicator if in Number or Percentage achievement) Target set for 2025 Status in 2000 Status in 2005 Status in 2010 Benchmark in 2015/16 Status in 2020/21 Status in 2022/23 Approximated status in 2025 Data source 1 Current health expenditure (% of GDP) 3.4 6.2 5.2 3.7 3.8 https://data.worldbank .org/indicator/SH.XPD .CHEX.GD.ZS?locati ons=TZ 2 Proportion of health facilities with a core set of relevant essential medicine available and affordable on a sustainable basis 0.64 76.1 78 https://www.nbs.go.tz/ nbs/takwimu/SDGs/S DGs_Indicators_in_Br ief_June_202023.pdf 3 Health worker workforce density per 10,000 population and distribution by major cadre 17.9 18.4 (2021) https://www.nbs.go.tz/ nbs/takwimu/SDGs/S DGs_Indicators_in_Br ief_June_202023.pdf Source: Row 1: World Bank (2023). Row 2 and 3: NBS (2023) Likewise, health workforce density per 100 population has slightly increased over time in the past 2 years. Moreover, the proportion of health facilities with a core set of relevant essential medicines available and affordable on a sustainable basis has significantly increased from 6.4 in 2015 to 7.8 in 2022 (Table 9). This progress in improving the health of the workforce and access to essential medicines is encouraging. However, there is still more work to be done to ensure that everyone has access to quality healthcare. A respondent from Bukoba MC noted that the regional hospitals are now capacitated to perform relatively complex procedures such as human body separation services, which were available in India, CT scans, dialysis, which was sought in hospitals in Nairobi, heart operations, etc. They said, “we have made big progress in the improvement of maternal health, medicines and services, possibly leading in East Africa in services like hearts (operation) institutes, kidney implants…which are big steps.” This observation is supported by the responses of Lake Zone interviewees who witnessed that employment in the healthcare domain has increased, and so has the number of new hospitals and dispensaries. A respondent from Musoma MC noted, “We used to have problems with the availability of medicines, but now we are at 99-100 percent availability. Facilities and health centers/dispensaries have increased in number, and health centers are now operating and have reduced maternal death and health primary services at 100 percent almost”. Another response from Bukoba MC said, “…I remember between 2008 and 2010 many areas had no health facilities. So, we often had to do outreach services, but now there are already established services since 2020”. As a result, improved health outcomes have been observed, for example, reduced mortality rate and improved maternal health care. Others, on the other hand, expressed dissatisfaction with the number of healthcare facilities available in their communities, as well as a lack of (qualified) staff and medicines in the existing healthcare facilities. For example, the Sengerema DC said, “We have made big steps as we have more facilities now but have a problem with medicines and shortage of staff… endangering people’s lives. And this is not that we do not have medical staff. Government should hire more staff…” Population infectious by endemic diseases Figure 8 shows a positive trend in the fight against HIV, as the prevalence of the disease has steadily decreased over the years. In 2000, the prevalence of HIV among individuals aged 15 to 49 years was 7.2 percent, but by 2020, it had reduced to 4.6 percent. This decline in HIV prevalence is a positive indicator, suggesting that efforts to prevent and manage the spread of HIV have been effective. Moreover, it means that fewer people are being infected with HIV because of increased awareness of HIV/AIDS, improved access to testing and treatment, and prevention programs. Evidence from Musoma MC shows that the government has done an excellent job in improving the availability and accessibility of ARVs. To quote them, “…in our work on HIV, we support mothers and children, and therefore, we have saved many lives across the country. The government has provided ARVs, which are now easily accessible, and people are sensitized to using them. They are available to rural areas…” Women seem to be disproportionately affected by HIV/AIDS. In 2000, women accounted for 57 percent of the total HIV-positive population, but by 2022, their share had risen to 62 percent. This indicates that targeted interventions and support are needed to address this gender disparity and ensure better access to prevention, treatment, and support services for women. Figure 9: Prevalence of HIV (% of population ages 15-49) Source: World Bank (..data/worldbank.org/indicator/…/locations=Tanzania) 26 | Page 27 | Page Table 10 shows the increasing burden on women and, hence, the need for continued efforts and targeted strategies to combat HIV/AIDS and the importance of addressing gender specific issues in healthcare and public health interventions. Table 10: Population infection rate by endemic diseases Intervention Outcome Areas (indicator if in Number or Percentage achievement) Target set for 2025 Status in 2000 Status in 2005 Status in 2010 Benchmark in 2015/16 Status in 2020/21 Status in 2022/23 Approximated status in 2025 Data source 1 Prevalence of HIV, total (% of the population ages 15-49) 7.2 6 5.4 5.1 4.6 https://data.worldba nk.org/indicator/SH. DYN.AIDS.ZS?locat ions=TZ 2 Women’s share of population ages 15+ living with HIV (%) 57 58 58 60 62 https://data.worldba nk.org/indicator/SH. DYN.AIDS.FE.ZS?l ocations=TZ 3 Incidence of TB (per 100,000 people) 503 510 426 306 222 https://data.worldba nk.org/indicator/SH. TBS.INCD?location s=TZ 4 TB treatment success rate (% new cases) 78 83 89 90 96 https://data.worldba nk.org/indicator/SH. TBS.CURE.ZS?loca tions=TZ 5 Incidence of malaria (per 1000 population at risk) 350.3 252 .3 140 .8 140.5 123.2 125.8 (2021) https://data.worldba nk.org/indicator/SH. MLR.INCD.P3?locat ions=TZ 6 Children with fever receiving antimalarial drugs (% of children under 5 with fever) 53 (1999) 59. 1 51.1 https://data.worldba nk.org/indicator/SH. MLR.TRET.ZS?loca tions=TZ 7 Use of insecticide treated bed nets (% of under-5 2 (1999) 16 63. 6 54.4 https://data.worldba nk.org/indicator/SH. MLR.NETS.ZS?loca Intervention Outcome Areas (indicator if in Number or Percentage achievement) Target set for 2025 Status in 2000 Status in 2005 Status in 2010 Benchmark in 2015/16 Status in 2020/21 Status in 2022/23 Approximated status in 2025 Data source population) tions=TZ Source: World Bank (2023) (data.worldbank.org/indicator/…./locations=Tanzania) In the same Table 10, one can see there has been some success in controlling the spread of Tuberculosis (TB), such that the treatment success rate increased from 78 percent in 2000 to 96 percent in 2020. Nevertheless, continuous efforts are necessary to reduce the incidence of TB further and enhance treatment success rates to eliminate TB as a major public health concern. There has also been some success in reducing the number of malaria cases per 1000 people at risk from 350 in 2000 to 126 in 2021. This decline in the incidence of malaria is due to factors including improved healthcare, increased awareness, and increased vector control measures such as spraying pesticides and the use of treated bed nets. The same table also shows the proportion of children under 5 years with a fever who received antimalarial drugs. Most interviewed respondents considered there has been convincing progress in providing access to quality health care by citizens in terms of new buildings, availability of drugs, and staff performance, leading to good health outcomes such as a decrease in maternal mortality rate. One respondent from Bukoba MC quipped, “… the policy requires each street (mtaa) to have a health center. Currently, we have nine health centers, so I see we have improved by   having more service providers. Pregnant women have services close to them. As a result,   the mortality rate is reduced”. In Muleba, DC; another respondent was quoted saying,   “…primary health care is done well since we now have more dispensaries, health centers,   regional and zonal hospitals”. They also had suggestions for improvement, such as   expanding health insurance coverage and access to every person in the country and   providing clear guidelines for people with disabilities (PWD).    3.2.5. Target 5: Access to quality reproductive healthcare   Target 5 focuses on ensuring access to quality reproductive health services for all individuals   of appropriate ages. It seeks to address sexual and reproductive well-being by offering a   wide range of healthcare information and services, including contraception, prenatal care,   maternal and child health services, as well as the prevention and treatment of sexually   transmitted infections (STIs). The target aims to enhance the overall health and well-being of   individuals, particularly in the realms of family planning, maternal and child health,   prevention, and treatment of STIs. Furthermore, Target 5 emphasizes gender equality within   reproductive health, aiming to promote equitable access and control over services and   information for people of all genders while eliminating gender-based disparities and   discrimination in healthcare.   28 | Page   29 | Page      Table 11: Ratio of women with access to reproductive clinical services   Intervention Outcome   Areas (indicator if in   Number or Percentage   achievement)   Target set for 2025   Status in 2000   Status in 2005   Status in 2010   Benchmark in 2015/16   Status in 2020/21   Status in 2022/23   Approximated status   in 2025   Data source   1   Proportion of   reproductive age   (15-49 years) with   satisfied modern   family planning   needs       38.4  31.1    https://www.nbs.go.tz/nb   s/takwimu/SDGs/SDGs_   Indicators_in_Brief_Jun   e_202023.pdf   2   Proportion of women   aged 15-49 years   with a live birth in a   given period who   received antenatal   care 4 or more times       43.2  65    https://www.nbs.go.tz/nb   s/takwimu/SDGs/SDGs_   Indicators_in_Brief_Jun   e_202023.pdf   Source : NBS (2023) (www.nbs.go.tz/takwimu/SDGs)      The proportion of women of reproductive age (15-49 years) with live birth and who received   antenatal care at least four times during their pregnancy increased from 43 percent in 2015   to 65 percent in 2022. On the other hand, satisfaction with modern family planning needs   among adults of reproductive age decreased between 2015 and 2022 (Table 11).  Figure 10   shows a consistent and significant reduction in the number of maternal deaths per 100,000   live births over 20 years.       Figure 10: Trend of Maternal mortality rate (per 100,000 live births) in Tanzania from 2000 to 2020      Source: Macrotrends (2023): Tanzania Maternal Mortality Rate 2000-2023 | www.MacroTrends.net      In 2000, there were approximately 760 cases, but the number dropped to 238 cases in 2022.   This signifies a decrease of more than three times in the incidence of maternal deaths. This   is attributed to substantial progress in maternal healthcare (access to skilled birth attendants   and emergency obstetric care) and a decrease in maternal mortality rates. Indeed, according   to the qualitative data collected, most respondents indicated an improvement in maternal   health over time. This progress has been credited to the improvements in infrastructure,   particularly road networks, as well as an increase in healthcare facilities in most areas of the   country.    A respondent from Mwanza MC stated, “We see some increase in the number of health   centers that led to these improvements. People do not have to bike with pregnant women   long distances as before. When I started working in Utete Rufiji, there were no roads and no   bridges;” Furthermore, compared to previous years, the maternal death rate has been   dramatically lowered. According to a Tarime MC sheikh, pregnancy-related deaths are   decreasing. As he stated, “Maternal death cases have reduced compared to earlier years.   There are fewer deaths due to pregnancy issues”. In Musoma MC, the mayor noted,   “Maternal health care is perfect, services of which are also available in our dispensaries.   There are more health centers now compared to only one five years ago. Consequently, the   number of patients coming to district level hospitals have decreased…”. They urge the   government to guarantee that medicines are readily available in all healthcare facilities so   that women and children do not have to struggle to obtain them.   3.2.6 Target 6: Reduced infant mortality rate   This target focuses on reducing infant and maternal mortality rates by three-quarters of their   current levels, and it is aligned with the global commitment to improve maternal and child   health, as outlined in the SDGs. The target aims to address the significant challenges faced   by Tanzania in reducing infant and maternal mortality rates. Infant mortality rate (IMR) refers   to the number of deaths per 1,000 live births within the first year of life, while maternal   mortality rate (MMR) refers to the number of maternal deaths per 100,000 live births. By   reducing infant and maternal mortality rates by three-quarters of their current levels,   Tanzania aims to improve the well-being and survival of mothers and infants significantly.   This target reflects the country’s commitment to ensuring safe pregnancies, childbirths, and   postnatal periods, ultimately contributing to the overall improvement of healthcare and   sustainable development in Tanzania.   Table 12: Survival rate of infants under-5 and mothers   Intervention   Outcome Areas   (indicator if in   Number or   Percentage   achievement)   Data source   Target set for 2025   Status in 2000   Status in 2005   Status in 2010   Benchmark in   2015/16   Status in 2020/21   Status in 2022/23   Approximated status   in 2025    30 | Page   31 | Page   Intervention   Outcome Areas   (indicator if in   Number or   Percentage   achievement)   Target set for 2025   Status in 2000   Status in 2005   Status in 2010   Benchmark in   2015/16   Status in 2020/21   Status in 2022/23   Approximated status   in 2025    Data source   1 Number of   maternal   deaths    11,000 9,300 8,700 6,700 5,400   https://data.worldban   k.org/indicator/SH.M   MR.DTHS?locations   =TZ   2 Birth   attended by   skilled health   worker (% of   total)    44   (1999)   45 50 64 92.4 85  https://data.worldban   k.org/indicator/SH.S   TA.BRTC.ZS?locatio   ns=TZ      https://www.nbs.go.t   z/nbs/takwimu/SDGs   /SDGs_Indicators_in   _Brief_June_202023   .pdf   3 Maternal   mortality   ratio (per   100,000 live   births)    760 559 486 330 238   https://data.worldban   k.org/indicator/SH.S   TA.MMRT?locations   =TZ   4 Infant   mortality   ratio (per   1000 live   births)    84.9 64.8 52 44.6 38.4   https://population.un.   org/wpp/   5 Under 5   mortality   ratio, total   (per 1000   live births)    129.9 94 71.7 58 49   https://data.unicef.or   g/country/tza/   6 Under 5   mortality   ratio, male   (per 1000   live births)    135 98.6 75.8 61.8 52.5   https://childmortality.   org/data/United%20   Republic%20of%20T   anzania   7 Under 5   mortality   ratio, female   (per 1000   live births)    124.5 89.3 67.5 54 45.2   https://childmortality.   org/data/United%20   Republic%20of%20T   anzania   32 | Page   Intervention   Outcome Areas   (indicator if in   Number or   Percentage   achievement)   Target set for 2025   Status in 2000   Status in 2005   Status in 2010   Benchmark in   2015/16   Status in 2020/21   Status in 2022/23   Approximated status   in 2025    Data source   8 Stillbirth rate   (per 1000   total births)    25.9 22.4 21.3 20.4 18.6   https://childmortality.   org/data/United%20   Republic%20of%20T   anzania   9 Life   expectancy   at birth, total   (years)    52 56 60 65 66   https://data.worldban   k.org/indicator/SP.D   YN.LE00.IN?location   s=TZ   10 Life   expectancy   at birth, male   (years)    51 55 58 62 64   https://data.worldban   k.org/indicator/SP.D   YN.LE00.MA.IN?loca   tions=TZ   11 Life   expectancy   at birth,   female   (years)    54 57 62 67 69   https://data.worldban   k.org/indicator/SP.D   YN.LE00.FE.IN?loca   tions=TZ   12 Immunizatio   n HepB3, (%   of one-year  old children)     89   (2002)   90 91 96 86   https://data.worldban   k.org/indicator/SH.IM   M.HEPB?locations=   TZ   13 Immunizatio   n DPT (% of   children   ages 12-23   months)    79 90 91 96 86   https://data.worldban   k.org/indicator/SH.IM   M.IDPT?locations=T   Z   14 Vitamin A   supplement   coverage   rate (% of   children   aged 6-59   months)    11 95 99 87 1   https://data.worldban   k.org/indicator/SN.IT   K.VITA.ZS?locations   =TZ   Sources: Various sources are shown in the last column of the table for each row.   In general, although both Tanzania Mainland and Zanzibar appear to do well in reducing   IMR to 49 and 45 deaths per 1,000 live births, respectively, they are still halfway to reaching   the ideal target of 20 for LMICs. The information in Table 12 reveals the following   developments in maternal health over time:       a) The number of maternal deaths has consistently declined over the years, i.e., from   11,000 in 2000 to 5400 in 2020. This suggests that efforts to improve maternal   healthcare, access to skilled birth attendants, and emergency obstetric care have been   effective in reducing maternal mortality and improving maternal health outcomes. This is   in line with observations from the field. According to a respondent from Tarime MC,   maternal fatalities have significantly reduced. They stated, “There are reduced deaths,   and this is due to improved health facilities—generally, about 90 percent are doing well”.   b) There was an increase in the proportion of births attended by skilled health workers from   44 percent of births in 1999 to 92.4 percent in 2020/21. This contributed to the reduction   of maternal and neonatal mortality rates. However, health personnel’s conduct has been   unpleasant in some parts of the country. For instance, a respondent from Sengerema,   DC, reported, “Sometimes the behavior of the staff is not good, e.g., women in labor are   abused. Hospitals are supposed to be hospitable —they do the opposite and insult these   women”.   c) The maternal mortality ratio declined from 760 maternal deaths per 100,000 live births in   2000 to 238 in 2020. The positive maternal health outcomes suggest successful efforts   in improving maternal healthcare, access to skilled birth attendants, and emergency   obstetric care.    d) The stillbirth8 rate, measured by the number of stillborn births per 1000 total births,   decreased from 25.9 in 2000 to 18.6 in 2020. There has been a consistent and positive   trend of reducing stillbirths in Tanzania over the years. The decreasing stillbirth rate   suggests positive outcomes due to a combination of improved access to quality maternal   care, better antenatal and intrapartum interventions, and enhanced newborn care   practices. It is also a result of investments made in healthcare infrastructure, skilled   attendance during childbirth, and greater awareness and education on maternal and   neonatal health.   e) There was also enhanced immunization coverage for two important vaccines, Hepatitis B   (HepB3) and Diphtheria, Pertussis, and Tetanus (DPT), used for protecting children from   preventable diseases and ensuring their overall health and well-being. Immunization   HepB3 (% of one-year-old children) increased from 89 percent to 96 percent in the past   15 years, while the DPT immunization increased from 79 percent to 96 percent over the   same period.   8baby born with no signs of life after 28 weeks of gestation or weighing 1000 grams or more.   33 | Page   Figure 11: Infant mortality ratio and under-5 mortality ratio 2000 – 2020   Source: Macrotrends (2023)   Figure 11 represents various indicators related to child health and mortality. First is IMR,   which measures the number of deaths of infants under one year of age per 1,000 live births.   In 2000, IMR was 84.9 deaths per 1000 live births, which declined to 38.4 deaths per 1000   live births in 2020. This shows a significant and consistent decline in the infant mortality ratio   over the years, indicating improvements in child health, access to healthcare services, and   efforts to reduce the number of infant deaths in Tanzania. A Bukoba MC respondent has   observed this and noted that “This has done well. There is a reduced infant mortality rate”.   In general, the total number of the under-5 mortality ratio has decreased from 129.9 deaths   per 1000 live births in 2000 to 49 deaths per 1000 live births in 2020.   The drop in the infant mortality ratio, under-5 mortality ratio, and stillbirth rate indicates   improvements in child and maternal health, access to healthcare services, and initiatives in   the country to minimize child mortality and enhance child survival rates. Moreover, opinions   and observations of the interviewed stakeholders support these findings and attribute them   to the effort by the government to improve healthcare facilities and infrastructure. In Tarime   MC, a respondent stated, “…the limited road infrastructure caused maternal deaths, but now   the rates have reduced”.   34 | Page   Table 13: Rate of malnutrition   Intervention Outcome   Areas (indicator if in   Number or Percentage   achievement)   Data source   Target set   for 2025   Status in   2000   Status in   2005   Status in   2010   Benchma   rk in   2015/16   Status in   2020/21   Status in   2022/23   Approxim   ated   status in   2025    1   Prevalence of   stunting height for   age, total (% of   children under 5)   47.4   44.2   40.3   35.4   32.1   https://data.worldbank.or   g/indicator/SH.STA.STN   T.ME.ZS?locations=TZ   2   Prevalence of   stunting height for   age, male (% of   children under 5)   50.9   (1999)   47   (2004)   45.6   36.7   37.8   (2019)   https://data.worldbank.or   g/indicator/SH.STA.STN   T.MA.ZS?locations=TZ   3   Prevalence of   stunting height for   age, female (% of   children under 5)   45.7   (1999)   41.9   (2004)   34.3   32.2   39.3   (2019)   https://data.worldbank.or   g/indicator/SH.STA.STN   T.FE.ZS?locations=TZ   Source: World Bank (2023) (data.worldbank.org/indicator/…./locations=Tanzania   Table 13 presents information relating to the prevalence of stunting height for age among   children under 5 years old. Stunting is a condition that occurs when children do not reach   their expected height for their age due to chronic malnutrition or inadequate nutrition during   their early years of life. The proportion of stunting prevalence has declined over the years,   from 47.4 per cent in 2000 to 32.1 percent in 2020, attributed to efforts to improve child   nutrition and address malnutrition. Although there have been improvements in reducing   stunting among both genders, the most recent data shows a slight increase in prevalence   among both male and female children, thus underlining the need for continuing efforts to   sustain success and reduce stunting rates in Tanzania. Enhancing nutrition programs,   mother and child healthcare, and tailored interventions to address variables contributing to   stunting are examples of such approaches.   3.2.7 Target 7: Universal Access to Safe Water   The target set was to increase the proportion of Tanzania's Mainland rural population with   access to piped or protected water as their main source from 50 percent in 2000 to 85   percent by 2025. The corresponding target for the urban population is 95 percent. By   December 2022, the proportion of the rural population with access to safe water had   reached 77 percent, while in urban areas, it had reached 88 percent, suggesting that the   targets for 2025 are most likely to be attained.   Universal Access to Safe Water   Based on baseline data (1999), water supply coverage in rural and urban areas was 46   percent and 68 percent, respectively, notwithstanding the importance of water for human   survival. Thirty percent of rural water supply coverage was inconsistent or non-existent,   while technical and economic losses reduced 52 percent of urban water delivery coverage.   Vision’s target was set to increase the proportion of the rural population with access to piped   or protected water as their main source from 50 percent in 2000 to 85 percent and for urban   95 percent by 2025.    35 | Page   Achievements    The proportion of the rural population with access to safe water has increased from 50   percent and 68 percent to 77 percent and 88 percent in rural and urban areas, respectively,   from 2000 to 2022. These achievements are 91 percent and 104 percent of the rural and   urban targets, respectively, set by the vision (URT-MoW, 2023). This suggests that the   target of 2025 for rural areas is more likely to be attained and surpassed in urban areas. The   achievements are less than that presented by Zanzibar, whereby in Zanzibar, 95.9 percent   of urban households used protected water sources as compared to 88.3 percent of rural   households (ZPC, 2020)9. These achievements include the implementation of policies (e.g.,   the 2002 Water Policy), undertaking institutional reforms (including the establishment of   Water and Sanitation Authorities to operate at district, regional or zonal levels), and   regulatory reforms (e.g., the National Water Supply and Sanitation Act 2009). The   government also established the Energy and Water Utilities Regulatory Authority (EWURA)   under the EWURA Act Cap 414-2006, with the mandate to regulate water utilities in a   transparent, effective, and efficient manner that ensures their quality, availability, and   affordability. The amended Water Supply and Sanitation Act No.5 of 2019 established the   Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Agency (RUWASA) to ensure adequate provision of   water services in rural communities, small towns, and district headquarters, taking over   mandates previously vested in PO-RALG, Regional Secretariats (RSs), and Local   Government Authorities (LGAs). In order to ensure that citizens have access to clean, safe   and adequate water services, the Government has been using reliable sources, including the   main lakes of Victoria, Tanganyika and Nyasa, to deliver water to the regions of Mwanza,   Geita, Simiyu, Kagera, Mara, Katavi, Kigoma and Rukwa, Ruvuma and Njombe. It has   established seven water laboratories for water quality assessment in Mwanza, Singida,   Shinyanga, Kigoma, Bukoba, Musoma and Dar es Salaam.   The government established the Water Sector Development Program (WSDP) (2006-2025),   whose budget and disbursement rates are indicated in Table (URT-MoW, 2015)10. Table 14   indicates the commitment against disbursed as of 2015.    Table 14: WSDP Commitments against Disbursements as of June 2015 in USD   Sources   Original   Commitment in   USD   Revised Commitment   in USD   Actual   Disbursement   as of June, 2015   Performance   (%)   GoT   251,000,000   353,775,148   353,775,148   100%   Basket   Partners*   410,000,000   683,797,353   663,489,570   *) 97%   Earmarked   Partners**   290,000,000   577,566,763   367,076,033   **) 64%   9ZPC (2020). Evaluation of Zanzibar Vision 2020   https://info.undp.org/docs/pdc/Documents/TZA/Evaluation%20of%20Zanzibar%20Vision%202020%20Final%20Version%20(1).   pdf   10 URT-MoW (2022). Water Sector Development Programme III. https://www.maji.go.tz/uploads/publications/sw1664866566  WSDP%20III%20FINAL%20FINAL%202022%20(1).pdf   36 | Page   Own Source   (LGAs)   0   5,533,604   5,533,603   100%   Total   951,000,000   1,620,672,869.   1,389,874,356   86%   Source: Water Sector Status Report 201511   The distribution of funds per WSDP commitments is indicated in Table 15. The Urban Water   Supply and Sanitation component received more funds (USD 722,812,656.80), followed by   the Rural Water Supply (USD 486,357,431.86), while the rest of the components had less   than USD 100 million.    Table 15: Funds Released against Expenditure as of June 2015   Component Description   Released Amount   (USD)   Used Amount   (USD)   %   Used   Balance Amount   (USD)   Water Resource   Management   83,368,283.67   76,303,466.66   92%   Rural Water Supply   486,357,431.86   7,064,817.01   457,093,358.16   94%   29,264,073.70   Urban Water Supply and   Sanitation   722,812,656.80   704,239,136.31   97%   Institutional   Strengthening and   Capacity Building   18,573,520.49   89,515,138.96   88,709,768.52   99%   805,370.44   Funds in Holding A/Cs &   Forex Acc   7,820,844.79   0   7,820,844.79   Total   1,389,874,356.08   1,326,345,729.65   95%   63,528,626.43   Source: Water Sector Status Report 2015   The government operationalized the National Water Investment Fund (NWIF) in FY 2016/17   to ensure steady financing and liquidity for water supply investments, a significant portion of   which was provided by a levy on vehicle fuel purchases (TZS 50 per liter of fuel). Among the   achievements in rural homes’ sanitation was that by 2023, about 7,236,188 households had   improved latrines, which is equivalent to 73.2 percent of households, while the target set by   2025 is 75 percent while households with handwashing facilities with running water and soap   have reached 42.7 percent (URT-MoH, 2023)12 (Table 16). The ongoing national initiatives   imply that by 2025, all the targets set under Universal access to safe water and sanitation   might be achieved.   11 URT-MoW (2015). Water Sector Status Report 2015   12 URT-MoW (2023). Ministry of Health Budget Speech https://www.parliament.go.tz/uploads/budgetspeeches/1683894445  document%20(64).pdf   37 | Page   38 | Page   Table 16: Water and Sanitation Status   Indicator   Target set for   2025   Status in 2000   Status in 2005   Status in 2010   Benchmark in   2015/16   Status in   2016/2017   Status in   2020/21   Status in   2022/23   Approximated   status in 2025   (use color   codes:   green=above   90%, etc.))   1 Rural   population   with access to   piped or   protected   water as their   main source   85 50%a 54%a  67%b 68.9%c 70.1%d 77%    2 Households   in Rural areas   with improved   sanitation   facilities    75    25%e 25%c 36%c 73.2%    3 Regional   Centre’s   population   with access to   piped or   protected   water as their   main source   95% 68% 78%c  86%e 86%c 84%c 88%    4 Households   connected to   conventional   public sewer   systems in   the Regional   Centre’s   30     20%c 13%c 13.5%    5 Non-Revenue   Water (NRW)   for Regional   Centre’s    20   35.98%f 31.7%f 37%c 36.8 %g      35.7%g    6 District   capitals and   areas small   towns   population   with access to   piped or   protected   water as their   main source   85    60%e 60%c 70%c     8 Dar es   Salaam   population   with access to   piped or   protected   water as their   main source   95    72%e 72%c  85%d 89%f    9 Households 30   4.8%h 10%e 10%c 13%c 13.5%    Indicator   connected to   convention   public sewer   systems in   Dar es   Salaam   10   11   Non-Revenue   Water (NRW)   for Dar es   Salaam    Number of   water sources   demarcated   and gazette   for protection   and   conservation    Target set for   2025   Status in 2000   Status in 2005   Status in 2010   20   200   53.7%i   Benchmark in   2015/16   Status in   2016/2017   Status in   2020/21   Status in   2022/23   Approximated   status in 2025   (use color   codes:   green=above   90%, etc.))   47%c   48%d   18%c   39%f   41   (21%)j   Notes: aUNDP (2007) Poverty Assessment Report; bMOF (2016). Five-Year Development Plan for 2016/17 to   2020/21. cESRF, 2011, Assessment of Tanzania Development Vision 2025; d Five Year Development Plan for   2021/22 to 2025/26 e(Water sector status report 2015-2020); f EWURA Annual Report For The Year Ended 30th   June, 2010); g(EWURA (2023) Water Utilities Performance Review; Report For Financial Year 2021/22; h- 2012   (A Review Of Sanitation And Hygiene In Tanzania April 2013); iEWURA Annual Report For The Year Ended 30th   June, 2010); jURT-MoW Budget Speech 2023/2024. Sources: Various sources are indicated in the notes for each   indicator.   In Zanzibar, the 2019/20 HBS report indicates that 91.5 percent of the households used   protected water sources for drinking, with urban households having better access (95.9 %)   to protected water sources compared to rural households (88.3 %).   3.2.8. Target 8: Life Expectancy Increased   Among the targets as part of the goal, the livelihoods of Tanzanians were to increase the life   expectancy to that of middle-income countries. There has been a global increase in life   expectancy in developing countries from 40 years in 1950 to 63 years by 19901. Studies   have revealed the drivers of life expectancy include growing incomes, increasing education,   and public investment in improving health services13. In addition, access to safe water, well  planned urbanization and public health expenditure had a positive contribution to prolonging   life expectancy14. Other influential factors in determining life expectancy are nutrition,   sanitation, and access to healthcare (WHO, 2019)15.    Both the Composite Goal for TDV2025 and Zanzibar Development Vision 2020 set a target   of attaining a life expectancy of 68 years for Tanzanians, equivalent to that of middle-income   countries globally, which is between 66 and 70 years. The country appears to have done   13    14    15    Husain, Abhar Rukh, 2002. "Life Expectancy in Developing Countries: A Cross-Section Analysis," Bangladesh   Development Studies, Bangladesh Institute of Development Studies (BIDS), vol. 28(1-2), pages 161-178, March-Jun   Mahfuz Kabir, 2008. "Determinants of life expectancy in developing countries," Journal of Developing Areas,   Tennessee State University, College of Business, vol. 41(2), January-M.   WHO (2019). Uneven access to health services drives life expectancy gaps: WHO (www.who.news.../4 April 2019   39 | Page   well in promoting drivers of life expectancy (e.g., education, primary health care, maternal   health care, and access to clean water, as shown elsewhere in this report), such that the   average reached 66 years for citizens in Tanzania Mainland (Table 17) and 65 years in   Zanzibar in 2022, compared with Uganda’s 63 years and South Sudan’s 55 years. Since   there are only 4 out of every 100 Tanzanians aged above 60 years, one would expect that   this segment would receive adequate care from the rest of the citizens. Unfortunately, the   age cohort below 20 years constitutes 25 out of 100 citizens, adding to the ratio of   dependence to almost 30 percent; however, more attention is paid to the younger generation   in need of education, medicare, and other services. Consequently, senior citizens are taken   care of less compared to children and the youth. This does not mean there have not been   any interventions in support of the youth, as the government has been progressively   increasing the number of established elderly homes, introducing community health insurance   covers, and opening special desks for the elderly in hospitals. The Revolutionary   Government of Zanzibar has gone a step further by introducing a monthly subsistence   allowance of TZS 20,000 for the elderly above 70 years of age as part of its social welfare   program.    Table 17: Summary of Realization of Targets on Life Expectancy as Part of the Goals for Attaining High-Quality   Livelihoods for all.   Intervention   Outcome   Areas16   Target set   for 2025   Status in   2000   Status in   2005   Status in   2010   Status in   2015/16   Status in   2020/21   Status in   2022/23   Approximated   status in 202517   Goal 1: Target 8: Life expectancy increased   70a   Life expectancy   at birth   52.4b   56.3(c)   60.1(c)   64.7(c)   64.7(c)   66.4(c)   Green   Average years   of life   65-70   45   (1992   census)   54   58   51    (2002   census)   61    (2022   census)   Green   Sources: aData. World Bank.org (2023). Average life expectancy at birth (total years) in 2021 for lower- and   middle-income countries; bHuman Development Index (HDI) - Our World in Data; (c) IPC (2020) op.cit. under   Table 3.   3.2.9. Target 9: Absence of abject poverty   This target appears to have performed least compared to other targets; statistically, it shows   levels of abject have been halved from about 19 percent in the early 2000s to about nine   percent in recent years. Abject poverty is usually measured by the inability to access at least   one meal per day. The Human Development Index (HDI), which incorporates other   measures of livelihoods such as income levels and education, suggests there have been   some improvements over time (Table 18). Tanzania’s ranking in the global HDI improved   from 0.40 in the year 2000 to 0.55 in 2021, against the target of reaching a HDI of 0.65 by   2025, which would have been met had it not been for the most recent disruptions caused by   COVID-19 and the Russia-Ukraine war. It is noteworthy that Tanzania’s HDI score of 0.55 in   16    17    Indicator in Number or Percentage achievement   Colour codes: grey=below 50 percent; amber=between 50 and 80 percent; green=above 90 percent likelihood   40 | Page   2021 was above the average of 0.505 for countries in the low human development group   and above the average of 0.518 for countries in Sub-Saharan Africa.    UNDP sponsored a project to compute localized HDI scores for the country by considering   other developmental dimensions unique to Tanzania that are excluded in computing the   global HDI. Based on that exercise, Tanzania Mainland’s HDI for 2015 was 0.614, which   was a small decrease from the HDI value of 0.627 for 2010 reported in the first localized HDI   in 2014 (ESRF, UNDP and MOF 2015). Looking at regional differences, HDI values ranged   from a high of 0.75 in the Kilimanjaro region to a low of 0.44 in the Kagera region. Map 3   shows that Kilimanjaro, Dar es Salaam, Arusha and Iringa are the four highest-ranking   regions for the HDI in Mainland Tanzania. In contrast, Kagera, Singida, Tabora and Kigoma   are the four regions with the lowest levels of human development (Map 2).   Map 2: Status of poverty in regions of Tanzania by category of localized HDI scores, 2015   Source: ESRF et.al. (2017). Map 1.1   Based on the 2019/20 Zanzibar Household Budget Survey, Zanzibar has managed to   reduce the proportion of people living below food poverty to 9.3 percent in 2019/20 from 13.2   percent in 2004/05, while poverty in rural areas decreased to 12.7 percent from 16.0 percent   in 2004/05. Interviewed stakeholders in Pemba and Unguja, scored failure to reduce poverty   as second after that of eliminating corruption among the least performed targets during   TDV2025 period. On the other hand, stakeholders in Tanzania Mainland were least satisfied   with that of reducing abject poverty, followed by access to clean water within 400 meters.   41 | Page   42 | Page   Table 18: Summary of Realization of Targets on Absence of Abject Poverty as Part of the Goals for Attaining   High-Quality Livelihoods for all.   Intervention Outcome   Areas (indicator if in   Number or Percentage   achievement)   Target set for   2025   Status in 2000   Status in 2005   Status in 2010   Status in   2015/16   Status in   2020/21   Status in   2022/23   Approximated   status in 2025   (use color   codes:   green=above   90%, etc.))   Goal 1: Target 9-Absence of abject poverty   Population below   the poverty line   (USD 1.00 per   day)     36% 33.6%   (2007) (a)   31%18 28.2%   (2012)19        Basic Needs   poverty   (proportion of the   population who   cannot afford   basic human   needs)    Urban 25.8%   12.9%       Rural 38.6%   24%       Human   Development   Index (Global   ranking)    0.60(d) 0.4020 0.45(c) 0.49(c) 0.52(c) 0.55(c)  amber   Human   Development   Index (Localized)   (HDI)    0.70   0.62721 0.614(d)   green   Sources: (a) IPC (2023). op.cit. (b)URT (2019). Tanzania National Nutritional Survey 2018 (op.cit); (c) UNDP   Human Development Index- Our world data.’ (d)ESRF (2017) op.cit      3.2.10. Challenges      Stakeholders were also asked to mention five areas of Goal 1 on improved livelihood, that   were least impressively performed during the past 22 years of TDV 2025 implementation.   The results suggest that the highest scores of under-performances fall under poverty   reduction (26.8%), improving water supply (24.8%), food security and malnutrition (12.1%)   (Figure 12).      18  ESRF et.al. (2017). Tanzania Human Development Report 2017. Figure 1.2 (Based on TBS Household Budget   Survey Data 2009/2010). THDR Report was jointly produced by the Economic and Social Research Foundation,   United Nations Development Programme in Tanzania and the Ministry of Finance and Planning of the United   Republic of Tanzania.      19  World Bank (2013). Tanzania Economic Update: Raising the Game. Can Tanzania Eradicate Extreme Poverty? Issue   4. December 2013.    20  Human Development Index (HDI) - Our World in Data   21  ESRF (2017). THDR 2017, Figure 1.1   Figure 12: Scores (%) of aspects of targets for improved livelihoods with the least impressive performance   (N=187)   Source: Field data 2023   Target 1: Food Secure Society with Reduced Malnutrition   Food self-sufficiency is above 100 but below 120 percent. This level does not provide   enough comfort for the government to encourage food export trade. Furthermore, the   country is still dependent on imported essential food items such as wheat (98 %), edible   vegetable oil (66 %t) and sugar (20 %). Among the reasons for the failure to produce   enough food are the inability of the government and private sector to invest in irrigated   farming (less than one-third of high-potential irrigable land is developed) and the reluctance   of the domestic financial sector to provide adequate development funding for primary   production (receive less than ten percent of total bank loans). Food micronutrient   fortification is limited to medium and large-scale food processors, living out small-scale   processors, who, in practice, supply the bulk of locally produced and processed food.    When it comes to attaining a well-nourished population, there is an observed fallacy   whereby regions with otherwise surplus food, such as Njombe and Iringa, also have the   highest prevalence of child stunting (see Map 3).   Map 3: Indications of the intensity of child stunting in Tanzania by region   Source: URT (2019)   43 | Page   Target 2: Universal Primary Education Provided   Most challenges identified from the field can be grouped into three major categories. First,   the scarcity and condition of facilities – the classes are congested with too many students   overseen by too few teachers. The high student-teacher ratio makes it difficult for teachers   to work effectively and overloads them which negatively affects students’ learning   outcomes. A CSO from Sengerema DC noted ‘…we did not have a good sense of how   many children we have so facilities became a problem. Later on, we started addressing the   challenge—started to have desks, toilets etc. we have made good steps. What remains is   employment of staff. Teachers—in some schools the ratio of students to teachers        is way   above normal. From 45 to 150 per class. So, this is still a big challenge. Even a saint   cannot work effectively. We should not expect children to pass exams with few teachers   and increasing number of classes because teachers are overloaded’.   Second, the quality of education offered at school. Some students complete primary school   without acquiring basic literacy skills – they are unable to read and write effectively. This   calls into question the importance of not only ensuring access to education but also   focusing on the quality of education. A project manager from Bukoba MC was quoted   saying “Education is still a challenge, especially the quality of education because proper   learning and understanding how to read and write is lacking. There is need to also improve   the availability of teaching facilities”.   Third, the education system does not provide training based on the talents of the students.   For certain students, a standard approach to schooling may be unproductive. Though it   may be difficult to assess and cater to all student’s talents and interests, opportunities   should be provided for students to develop ‘non-academic’ talents such as art, music,   science, or athletics. We need to put less emphasis on standardized testing and more   emphasis on teaching pupils the skills they need to succeed in life. As mentioned by a   respondent from Mwanza MC “Our education system is not training specializations based   on talents. We need to invest in a competence-based education system starting from early   ages”.   Target 3: Gender Equality and Empowerment   Early marriages and unwanted pregnancies remain among the major contributory factors to   school drop-out for girls. The 2015/16 Tanzania Demographic and Health Survey (TDHS)   shows that 23 per cent of girls aged 17 had already given birth or were pregnant. Early   pregnancy puts both the mother and child at heightened risk of malnutrition, complications   in childbirth and death. Also, despite the progress in primary and secondary education as   shown in Figure 6, there is still a persistent gender gap at tertiary level of education (Figure   6, panel C). This highlights that, over the years, more male students have been enrolled in   tertiary education compared to their female counterparts. This ongoing gap underscores a   continuing challenge in achieving gender balance at the highest levels of education.    With gender equality, community sensitization and uptake of gender issues is a challenge.   In some areas, women are mistreated because of their gender, for example, not getting   paid for work done, even after reporting to their appropriate channels. In Sengerema DC, a   politician said, “The government is making efforts but still struggling. Yesterday, I saw a girl   who came to complain that she was not paid, and the other government leaders worked   hard to ensure she got paid. This is a community thing, so we need to work hard to   strengthen it”.   44 | Page   Cultural norms are a challenge to achieving gender equality in some communities. For   example, in some areas, women are not free to speak up or express their opinions in   meetings. These attitudes are deeply ingrained at the household level, which may not be   evident at the community level. Therefore, achieving meaningful changes may require   interventions that work not only at the community level but also within households to   challenge and transform these norms. The general consensus from stakeholders consulted   was that although there have some progress raising societal awareness on the rights of   women, there are still some impediments due to deep-rooted “cultural norms and values   whereby women are not allowed to speak their minds and are expected to orders from   men”.    Some stakeholders observed that there are still challenges in understanding what gender   equality really means. Some participants to a FGD in Musoma DC noted that “when women   are economically empowered, they disrespect their husbands”. And that “Women have got   it all wrong about gender equality; when they have money, they start controlling and   disposing of men”. Another observation is that this knowledge contradicts religious beliefs:   women are meant to respect males, yet they do not.    The final observation is that gender equality focuses primarily on addressing women’s   issues. This may result to a lack of attention and resources for addressing men’s   challenges related to gender inequality. According to a FGD in Musoma MC “men have   issues as well, but do not have a place to report their issues or seek solace in addressing   their concerns”. This suggests a need for a more balanced approach to gender equality that   recognizes and addresses the unique challenges faced by both men and women,   emphasizing the importance of developing a more inclusive framework that supports   gender equality for all.,   Target 4: Access to Quality Primary Health Care   Access to primary healthcare is limited in some areas due to the lack of healthcare   facilities, particularly in rural areas. People must travel considerable distances to reach a   healthcare facility, which can be difficult and expensive, and it can also cause treatment   delays. The lack of healthcare facilities causes geographic inequities, overcrowding, and   lengthy wait times in existing facilities, all of which have a negative impact on public health.   The existing healthcare facilities are inadequately equipped and staffed, i.e., the staff  patient ratio is a challenge, putting people’s health and lives at risk. Moreover, at some   health clinics, doctors and nurses are only available for a few hours a day and are not   present most of the time, jeopardizing the quality of healthcare provided.   High cost of healthcare services, which makes them unaffordable to most people. This   affordability challenge creates significant access barriers, delaying care and exacerbating   healthcare inequalities. In a way, it transforms healthcare from a fundamental right into a   luxury, undermining public health and perpetuating poverty cycles. The government needs   to design interventions that aim at reducing costs, expanding insurance coverage, and   investing in public healthcare infrastructure to ensure equitable access to affordable   healthcare for all Tanzanians. A respondent from Mwanza MC said, “Service costs are still   45 | Page   high and unaffordable to many people, compelling some sick people avoiding seeking   medical help from hospitals”.   Health insurance is a serious challenge in some areas and for certain age groups. Some   procedures, such as surgery, ultrasonography, and medications, are not covered by   insurance in some healthcare facilities, according to respondents. For example, NHIF is   only accepted in a few hospitals, mostly public ones. “…NHIF and ICHF pay TZS 30,000,   but when you go to a health service, not all diseases are covered, e.g., ultrasound,   operation, etc., are covered. The whole system must be improved, or maybe service   providers do not understand the way it works”. Another concern with health insurance is   that the elderly are excluded from receiving some healthcare treatments. Respondents at   Tarime MC stated, “…exclusion of the elderly in healthcare, for example, for 70+ years,   some services are not available to them. They must buy their medications”.   Target 5-Access to Quality Reproductive Healthcare   Fertility issues among women   It has been reported that, currently, there is a problem with the ability of some women to   conceive. Women are having trouble in getting pregnant due to various reasons. Moreover,   fertility issues can contribute to challenges in maternal health by affecting the ability to have   healthy pregnancies and safe deliveries. According to Mwanza MC respondents, the   government should investigate alternatives that might help women conceive, for example,   IVF (In Vitro Fertilization). They stated, “Women are now not conceiving. IVF services seem   to work in other countries—the government should also make this service accessible and   affordable”.   Staff scarcity   The number of healthcare workers available in hospitals or health centers is insufficient to   adequately meet the needs of patients, particularly women seeking maternal health   services. This challenge has generally been observed in the primary healthcare sector;   however, it poses a unique challenge to maternal health services, especially through   intensified risks for pregnant women and their infants.     Un-regulation of providers for maternal health services   The government is lax in setting and enforcing standards to ensure that maternal health   services are safe, effective, affordable and of high quality. This leads to adverse health   outcomes for pregnant women, mothers, as well as infants. For example, healthcare   providers charge fees for services identified as free by the government, such as maternity   cards and medications, and sometimes they overcharge some services to make more   profits (corrupt). In other cases, the charges are not explicit, and patients are charged with   their awareness. According to respondents from Musoma MC, these costs are frustrating,   unfair to people and erode trust among people in the community. To quote one of them,   “Maternal health services are not well regulated; some providers charge money for   attending expecting mothers contrary to national policy exempting them. If the Minister for   Health repeatedly emphasizes that the services are free, why do service providers charge?   46 | Page   It is frustrating to hear the service is free, but when you visit hospitals, you are told to pay   for the rendered services”. Stakeholders urged the government to strengthen its service   delivery monitoring system so that ‘untrustworthy’ healthcare centers can be held   accountable for going against government policy. The government should establish and   enforce effective regulatory measures to guarantee the provision of high-quality and safe   care to those in need.   Lack of Facilities and Understanding the Needs of People with Disabilities   There is a significant deficiency in infrastructure or resources that are specifically designed   and equipped to accommodate individuals with disabilities within the context of maternal   healthcare, such as accessible clinics, transportation, and supportive services. The   healthcare providers must be sensitized to deal with such patients. A FGD from Mwanza   MC stated, “PWD have a big challenge of communicating and therefore disadvantaged due   to the absence or shortage of sign translators, infrastructures, ramps, etc. There is also   public ignorance on some types of disabilities such as albinism—even among people who   are expected to know better and hence the need to target health workers in understanding   all aspects of PWD.    Target 6-Reduced Infant Mortality Rate   Despite earlier successes in raising the rate of infant immunization to above 90 percent,   most recent data suggests decreased coverage to 86 percent for essentials, which requires   special attention to sustain the earlier achievements. Corruption persists in some   healthcare facilities, affecting the services provided, notably those to infants. People are   required to purchase birth instruments and medicines that are supposed to be provided free   of charge, causing delays in accessing services and, in some cases, death. The emphasis   on corruption was salient, which disheartened most of the respondents. Corruption is   preventing people from accessing healthcare services. They said, “…if you bribe the   nurses, you get all these very quickly, including visitations outside official hours”. Other   comments included that “Service provision is not timely given, thus causing death.   Bureaucracy attracts corruption”.   Target 7: Universal Access to Safe Water at Short Distance   The main challenges are threefold: (i) the impact of climate changes and environmental   degradation, which results in a high proportion of non-yielding drilled water wells because   of the receding water table in areas expected to have enough underground aquifer; (ii)   allocating adequate financial resources to cope with a rising number of new settlements   and householders; (iii) lows capacity within the private to provide drilling services; (iv)   limited innovative technologies for sustainable utilization of water resources available   including rainwater harvesting, wastewater treatment and desalinization; and (v) low   capacity to manage water resources. Although financial resources are mentioned as   among the challenges in hastening the supply of water and sanitation, there is also   evidence of limited absorption capacity of provided funds within the agreed timeframe. This   was the case with the WSDP II, which started in July 2016 and ended in June 2022 with a   total commitment of USD 3.2 billion. By the end of December 2021, the disbursement was   47 | Page   only 37 percent of the overall commitment. Also, until April 2022, the state of sewage   disposal had reached 13.5 percent, which is 45 percent of the target set by 2025.    Target 8: Life Expectancy Increased   There are two dimensions of challenges: those related to facilitating prolonged life   expectancy and those related to maintaining quality of life at advanced ages. Sub-optimal   successes in reducing malnutrition at early ages and among active adults imply having   senior citizens who are relatively not optimally healthy, demanding constant medical care   above 65 years of age. The lack of a universal national system for taking care of the elderly   implies living miserable lives for senior citizens. The cost of medical insurance increases   with age, making it unaffordable for most elderly.    Target 9: Absence of Abject Poverty    The main challenge in reducing abject poverty has been a shortage of public spending on   programs that can create sustained jobs and/or incomes for more people. There is also a   lack of specific job creation or self-employment opportunities for the youth, primarily due to   the absence of officially supported business, agricultural or industrial parks by Local   Government Authorities. Although abject poverty is mainly defined as relating to affording   one meal per day, there is a need to bring other critical dimensions, such as the quality of   shelter, that define decent living. More than one-third of Tanzanians, mostly in rural areas   and in some specific regions/districts, live in makeshift structures built using sticks and   grass or tree leaves. This should not be tolerated in the 21st century.   3.3   Goal 2: Attaining Good Governance and the Rule of Law   Tanzania subscribes to the United Nations (UN) system, which underscores that the rule of   law is a principle of governance in which all persons, institutions, and entities, public and   private, including the State itself, are accountable to laws that are publicly promulgated,   equally enforced, and independently adjudicated, and which are consistent with   international human rights norms and standards. It requires measures to ensure adherence   to the principles of supremacy of the law, equality before the law, accountability to the law,   fairness in the application of the law, separation of powers, participation in decision-making,   legal certainty, avoidance of arbitrariness, and procedural and legal transparency. The rule   of law is fundamental to international peace and security, and the rule of law and   development are strongly interlinked. There has been a series of legal reforms in Tanzania   over the years, all meant to improve the country’s governance framework, as shown in   Annex 2.1. It included concerted efforts by the government to enhance moral uprightness in   society, with the hope that it will have some positive effects in promoting ethical behavior,   reducing corruption and improving the state of governance in general. Among the   measures undertaken over the past 22 years include:    a) Integrity Committees were established in every MDA, RS and LGA for the purpose of   coordinating the implementation of the National Anti-Corruption Strategy and Action   Plans (NACSAPs).   48 | Page   b) The Public Service Code of Conduct was developed to guide ethical and moral   behavior in the conduct and discharge of duties.    c) Awareness Campaign against Corruption through Media, Anti-Corruption Clubs,   Community Groups, etc., were significantly undertaken.    d) Appointment of Ethics Tribunal Members by the President of the United Republic of   Tanzania in 2009 under section 26(1) of the Public Leadership Code of Ethics Act No.   13 of 1995 to enforce the code.   3.3.1. Key achievements   There were about ten areas of interventions that were targeted for improvement as part of   improving governance in the country.   The best five targeted areas for improved governance that were scored as most   impressively performed during the last 22 years were access to justice, which was an   appreciation of the way courts of law had made some improvements in handling cases   (22.6%), enforcement of rules and regulation (12.3%), which was qualified by some as   compliance with procedures (7.3%), protection of human rights (12.4%), and transparency   and accountability within public institutions (10.2%) (Figure 13).   Figure 13: Target areas scored (%) by key informants as most impressively performed (N=187)   Source: Field data 2023   The leading reasons for the performance observed under the goal of improving governance   included observed governance practices among public institutions (29.4%), good legal   frameworks (16.1%), improved awareness of laws (12.2%), respect of the laws (8.3%) and   civic education (5.0%) (Figure 14).   49 | Page   Figure 14: Scores (%) of reasons for the observed successes in improved governance (N=180)   Source: Field data 2023   Target 1: Moral and cultural uprightness   TDV 2025 envisaged a country whose citizens observe acceptable moral and cultural   values, notwithstanding the dynamism associated with these two metrics. The Vision   document referred to culture as "a people's way of life," i.e., the perception and manner of   doing things that not only identifies a people but also sets particular standards of moral   behavior and self-esteem necessary for a decent socio-economic survival and development   of a society” (Planning Commission 2000: p.6122). It goes on to say that “the parameters for   defining a people's culture are constructed from a society's vision of what constitutes an   ideally decent socio-economic structure for its survival. The members of society are then   expected to lead a life that strives to make that vision a reality”. It was emphasized that   “people must be in the right frame of mind. They must espouse the required beliefs, morals,   ethics, values, and attitudes in order to participate effectively and meaningfully in the socio  economic processes for development” (ibid). There was public concern in 1999 when   collecting views that traditional societal values were fast being eroded through the influence   of mass media and interactions with foreigners visiting the country. The authors of   TDV2025 Composite Development Goals (CGs) observed in 2000 that “It is not clear what   constitutes a Tanzanian way of life. Because of the vacuum, there is utter chaos. The youth   are busy adapting to Western culture, Arab culture, or other foreign cultures. The youth,   often with the assistance of parents, are diligently cramming the American race-hate rap,   smoking dope, or flying the Union Jack, the French, Canadian and American flags and   even the Nazi Swastika. Religious fanaticism (both Christian and Islam) is keeping   hundreds of people, especially the unemployed, youth and women, in churches and   mosques for many hours. These people are now looking up to heaven for miracles as   solutions to their socio-economic problems” (Planning Commission, 2000: p.62).   It was not easy to assess the extent to which Tanzanians have remained faithful to their   traditional morals and culture over the last 22 years. However, in dealing with mass media's   influence on societal morals and values, some measures were taken to establish a self  vetting standard code of ethics for media professionals and a code of ethics for   broadcasters, and the joint support by the Media Council of Tanzania (MCT) and the   22    TDV2025 Composite Goals (CG), Section 2.4 pg.61   50 | Page   Government. Media houses have tried to disseminate locally made content in music,   drama, and movies, contrary to the situation in 1999 when the drafters of TDV2025   lamented mass media’s negative influence.   The opinions of interviewed stakeholders, however, provided some clues on areas that   appear to have impressed them the most. Areas that had the highest scores included   respect for each other (19.5%) and fairness and justice (12.1%). Integrity (8.1%), honesty   (8.7%), and ethics (9.4%) were mentioned individually, and so if joined, they constitute a   combined score of 26.2 percent. On the other hand, the responses for “responsible officers”   (8.1%) and for “responsibility and accountability” (8.1%) bring a combined score of 16.2   percent (Figure 15).   Figure 15: Scores (%) of areas that were impressively implemented and achieved.   Source: Field data 2023   Dealing with Drug Abuse   Tanzania has been facing an increase in drug abuse and trafficking problems. To fight this   problem, the government of the United Republic of Tanzania has taken different measures   by involving various stakeholders to address drug problems in the country.   The Drug and Prevention of Illicit Traffic in Drug Act Cap 95 was enacted in 1995 and   established the Drug Control Commission (DCC) with the responsibility of defining,   promoting, and coordinating drug control activities in the country. The DCC was replaced   by the Drugs Control and Enforcement Authority (DCEA) in 2017 based on the Drug   Control and Enforcement Act No. 5 of 2015, which provided more powers to powers to   conduct investigation, arrest, search, and seizure as part of its core mandates provided   instruments to promote, coordinate and implement all measures geared towards control of   drugs, drug abuse and trafficking in drugs23.   23    Section 4(1) of the Drug Control and Enforcement Act No 5 of 2015.   51 | Page   52 | Page         Table 19: Number of Persons Arrested for Illicit Drugs Trafficking and Among of Drugs   Sources: (a) Taarifa ya Hali ya Dawa za Kulevya ya Mwaka 2021, Mamlaka ya Kudhibiti na   Kupambana na Dawa za Kulevya. www.dcea.go.tz ; (b) Taarifa ya Hali ya Dawa za Kulevya ya   Mwaka 2015, Tume ya Kuratibu Udhibiti wa Dawa za Kulevya, Ofisi ya Waziri Mkuu. www.dcea.go.tz      Establishment of Rehabilitation Centers      Through DCEA, more than 42 Rehabilitation Centers (sober houses) have been   established in Tanzania aimed to provide special treatments for drug users have worked in   different regions, including Dar es Salaam, Dodoma, Tanga, Kilimanjaro, Morogoro, Iringa,   Mwanza, Kagera, Pwani and Arusha.       There have been efforts to deal with those supplying illicit drugs by arresting and taking   them to courts of law for conviction, as shown in Table 19.      Divorce Rate      The status of divorce rate registered by RITA has increased from 42 in 2011, 150 in 2015,   and then 303 in 2020/21. The number of divorces has also been on the increase24 taking   note that this is an iceberg of a more significant problem because most of them happen         24  Hotuba ya Waziri wa katiba na sheria, Mheshimiwa Dk Damas Daniel Ndumbaro (Mb), wakati akiwasilisha bungeni   makadirio ya mapato na matumizi ya wizara kwa mwaka wa fedha 2022/2023. Pg 22. Accessed at   www.parliament.go.tz   Indicator Target   Set for   2025   Baseline   2000   Status    2005   Status   2011   Status   2015   Status   2020/21   Status   2022/23   Approximated   Status in   2025   Arrested drugs Cocaine   (Kg)  2.104 0.362 128 17.788 0.811 1.7    Accused person   (Cocaine)  05 20 30 281 100  Increasing   trend   Arrested drugs Heroin   (Kg)  5.322 9.9 264.26 64.752 1,124.52 254.7 Increasing   trend   Accuses person (Heroin)  200 269 20 474 588  Increasing   trend   Arrested drugs (Mirungi)   Tons  1,415.1 1,122 102 16,599 10.93 15.2 Decreasing   trend   Accused person   (Mirungi)  265 289 100 1,780 9,484  Increasing   trend   Arrested drugs (Bangi)   tons  24.9 150.5 17.3 22.0136 22.74 12,869 Increasing   trend   Accused person Bangi  4,431 3,949 39 13,275 1,395     without officially reporting to the authorities. This increasing trend, based on official records,   is an indication of an underlying crisis in the stability of the family unit as the basis for   national unity.   Target 2: Adherence and Respect to the Rule of Law   In ensuring that Tanzanians build a sustainable culture of adherence and respect to the   rule of law, several measures were taken aimed at (a) strengthening the judicial system to   enable it to dispense justice to citizens fairly, (b) building the capacity of law enforcement   agencies and their staff; (c) strengthening the legal framework through amendments of   existing legislations; (c) creating public awareness on their rights and responsibilities in   adherence and respecting established laws.   According to the World Justice Report (see Table 18), the country has improved   tremendously in its endeavor to dispense justice to citizens. This success has been due to   several measures that have been undertaken over the past 22 years. They include: (i) the   Community Service Act, No.6 of 2002 Cap. 291, which was enacted as early as 2002 to   provide for community service in lieu of prison sentence as an attempt to decongest the   prisons, (ii) enacted the National Prosecution Service Act in 2008, thereby separating   investigation and prosecution as they were before, (iii) created specialized courts by having   three new divisions – Land Division (2002), Commercial Division (1999) and Corruption and   Economic Crimes Division (2016); (iv) In 2014, the Chief Justice promulgated the Legal Aid   (Criminal Proceedings) Rules, which have widened the threshold for legal aid eligibility, (v)   continuously provided human resources to the judiciary. The number of judges of higher   courts, for example, has increased exponentially in the last ten years, including 50 of them   appointed during the last two years. The appointment included more women high court   judges, (vi) modernization of the judiciary involved the digitization of court procedures and   adopting in 2016 a policy of “Zero Case Backlog". Through this, every Judge and   Magistrate is assigned a minimum number of cases to be finalized within a year; and (vii)   among the ongoing initiatives is ensuring mobile court services, started in 2019, cover all   districts. The report by the Commission established in January 2023 to Investigate   Tanzania’s Criminal Justice System will further improve the administration of the rule of   law. The outcome of these measures is reflected in the decline in criminal cases, as shown   in Table 20. The trend was fastest during the 5th Phase of government in nearly all aspects   of crime. If this trend picks up under the 6th Phase government, then Tanzania will be   heading to a low-level criminal activity category and improving her ranking in the global   league.   Table 20: Number of Offenses Reported by Type, Tanzania, 2016 – 2020   Offense    2016   2017   2018   Against   Person   Murder    3,318    3,026    2,655    Rape    7,645    8,039    7,617    Un-natural   Offense    Child Stealing    1,202    1,184    1,201    170    129    113    2019   2020   2,619    2,225   7,837    1,483    89   7,263   1,205   84   53 | Page   54 | Page   Offense  2016 2017 2018 2019 2020   Child   Desertion  159 142 112 148 153   Defilement  18 26 34 29 52   Human   Trafficking 55 32 27 18 19   Related to   Property        Theft of Arms  33 28 35 15 17   Robbery on   Highway 29 55 1 0 0   Armed   Robbery 726 574 438 405 297   Robbery with   Violence  3,945  2,796  2,117  2,122  1,482   Theft of   Motorcycle  5,633  5,077  5,236 4,802  4,823   Theft of motor   vehicles  452  267 228 184 175   Livestock theft  5,106  4,908  4,203 4,097  3,707   Arson cases  1,962  1,439  1,137 975 982   Financial   Crimes  1,990 1,640  1,303 1,218  905   Against State   Security and   Public   Tranquility          Unlawful   Possession of   Firearms   472 365 349 303 169   Illicit Drugs  679 902 702 502 429   Government   trophies  1,087  1,034  922  1,014 728   Smuggling  246 233 308 684 332   Illicit local   liquor  6,977  6,890  6432 5,611 4,602   Undeclared.   possession of   bombs   15 8 2 1 0   Illegal Fishing  149 141 525 145 23   Illegal   Immigrant  1,221  1,164  1,134 1,038  862   Source: URT, 2020 Tanzania in Figures (Dodoma: National Bureau of Statistics)   Table 21: Tanzania’s Scores for the Indicators of Rule of Law as per the World Justice Project, MCC and World   Bank   Indicator of   Rule of Law   Year   200   2   200   5   20O   7   201   0   201   3   201   5   201   6   201   7   201   8   201   9   202   0   202   1   202   2   55 | Page   Constraints   on   Government   Power         0.52 0.52 0.52 0.52 0.51 0.51 0.51   Control of   Corruption 0.14 0.09 0.31 0.32 0.04 0.37 0.39 0.40 0.40 0.42 0.42 0.42 0.41   Open   Government       0.51 0.39 0.38 0.38 0.38 0.38 0.37 0.37   Fundamenta   l rights 0.36 0.36 0.36 0.36 0.35 0.51 0.48 0.48 0.48 0.45 0.43 0.43 0.43   Order and   Security      0.58 0.64 0.67 0.67 0.69 0.69 0.69 0.69   Regulatory   Enforcemen   t   0.20 0.35 0.37 0.36 0.43 0.43 0.42 0.40 0.40 0.43 0.44 0.44 0.43   Criminal   Justice      0.37 0.41 0.39 0.39 0.38 0.38 0.38 0.37   Source: https://worldjusticeproject.org/rule-of-law-index/global/Tanzania.   Other areas that Tanzania has also done well over time in creating a society governed by   the rule of law has been:      a) Smooth transition of national leaders under multi-party elections:  Among the   hallmarks of Tanzania’s political leadership has been successful and peaceful   conducting of general elections involving national leaders since the late Mwalimu Julius   K. Nyerere stepped down after the election of the Second Phase (1985-1995) President   H.E. Ali Hassan Mwinyi, who was democratically succeeded by the Third Phase (1995  2005) President H.E Late Benjamini William Mkapa. He was democratically replaced by   the Fourth Phase (2005-2015) President H.E Jakaya Mrisho Kikwete, before the   coming in of the Fifth Phae (2015-2021) President H.E late John Pombe Joseph   Magufuli. A test on the maturity of the country’s democratic system came when   President Magufuli died in 2021 and the succession rule regarding the Presidential   Running-mate was applied and therefore the Vice President automatically took over as   the Sixth Phase (2021 to 2025). President: H.E Samia Suluhu Hassans became the first   female president, not only in Tanzania, but in the whole of East Africa. The country has   also been conducting peaceful elections for Members of Parliament, Councilors along   with Local Authorities Elections for every five years also justifies the respect and   compliance to rule of law.    b) Building the capacity of regulatory enforcement agencies and their staff: In   dealing with regulatory enforcement, the government established dedicated agencies in   each critical sector responsible for stakeholders’ compliance with laid down rules and   regulations, thus creating a well-functioning society and trust in government. These   include, among others, EWURA (energy and water sector), TMDA (medicine and   medical equipment), TBS (standards of goods and machinery), TCAA (aviation safety   standards), and LATRA (surface transportation). According to the World Justice Report,   Tanzania’s index on regulatory enforcement improved by 100 percent, rising from 0.20   in 2002 to 0.43 in 2020 (see Table 21).      c) The Human Fundamental Rights Index improved from 0.36 in 2002 to 0.43 in 2022.      d) More efforts are needed to build a country governed by the rule of law. This is   because Tanzania’s score in the World Justice Project is 0.46, which is less than 50   percent. This may not come as a surprise because there have been considerable   violations of the rule of law by different actors – from individual citizens to state   apparatuses. Below is a sample list of lapses that might have contributed to tarnishing   the country’s rule of law image: - Incipient lawlessness: there are actions which indicate society’s drive towards   lawlessness. These include the apparently seen as innocuous actions like crossing   the red lights while driving to much more serious actions like mob justice. - The persecution of people with albinism, many of whom were killed for their body   parts allegedly required by witch doctors; there was also the violence against and   killing of elderly women alleging they were witches in some regions of Tanzania.   2009 Legal and Human Rights Centre report claims for five years, between 2004   and 2009, there was a total of 2,585 killings of older women in eight regions. - Newspaper reports of unexplained abductions, killings, and disappearances of   citizens.  - The shooting of a legislator during a parliamentary session break in Dodoma in   broad daylight in 2017. - The cases of the Executive not implementing Court decisions flouting the principle   of separation of powers among the three pillars of government. - The international community’s perception is that there are forced evictions of people   from their traditional lands, purportedly to release land for development purposes,   as was the case in Loliondo in 2023. - Corruption in public procurement, involving mega scandals such as in the   Independent Power Tanzania Limited (IPTL), BoT Twin Towers, Alex Stewart   Assayers, Meremeta Limited, Mchuchuma mine, Loliondo Hunting Blocks, and   lately, the over-invoicing in the purchase of a government aircraft.    Target 3: Absence of corruption and other vices   The establishment of watchdog and oversight institutions (WOIs) and successive phases of   implementation of the National Anti-corruption Strategic Action Plan (NACSAP) have   yielded some positive results in reducing corruption, as per evidence provided by surveys   undertaken by national and international institutions. Among the prominent WOIs are the   President’s Office, the State House (Good Governance and Reforms Coordination Division   (PO-GGRD), the Prevention and Combating of Corruption Bureau (PCCB), the Ethics   Secretariat (ES), the President’s Office – Public Service Management and Good   Governance (PO-PSM&GG), the Law Reform Commission (LRC), Parliament, the Attorney   General’s Chambers (AGC), Judiciary, Prevention and Combating of Corruption Bureau   (PCCB), Tanzania TRA, CAG, Tanzania Police, and PPRA, among others.   The lead WOIs, reducing corruption is PCCB, were established under section 5 (1) of the   Prevention and Combating of Corruption Act No.11/2007. The President’s office-GGRD   coordinated the implementation of NACSAP, which complements the country’s reform   programs such as the Public Service Reform Program (PSRP), Public Finance   Management Reform Program (PFMRP), Financial Sector Reform Program (FSRP), Legal   Sector Reform Program (LSRP); and Local Government Reform Program (LGRP). Others   56 | Page   were Business Environment Strengthening for Tanzania (BEST) and the National Strategy   for Growth and Reduction of Poverty (NSGRP 2005 - 2010). In the same way, NACSAP   engendered the enactment of the Anti-Money Laundering Act and the subsequent creation   of the Financial Intelligence Unit (FIU), review of the Anti-Corruption Act, Public Leadership   Code of Ethics Act and Public Procurement Act. Also, the ratification and domestication of   the SADC Anti-Corruption Protocol and the UNCAC came along with the establishment of   oversight institutions such as the CHRAGG, Public Audit Act No. 11 of 2008, e-Government   Agency (2012), the use increased of ICT and the PPRA (2004, RE 2011).   The last public perception survey by PCCB on National Governance and Corruption in   2020 revealed that although the list of institutions perceived by the public as the most   corrupt remained almost the same (e.g., law enforcement (ranked first), justice   dispensation (ranked third), health service provision (ranked second) and tax administration   (ranked fourth), there was a perception that they had somehow improved in offering   services and therefore reduced levels of corruption compared to a similar previous survey   in 2009. The business community, on its own, ranked tax administration as the second   most corrupt segment of public service delivery. On average, the level of corruption was   perceived as lessening by 78 percent of respondents: public officials (78%), households   (77%), and enterprises (80%).  Other research organizations that have indicated the   downward trend include the World Justice Project whose data show that Tanzania has   improved her score from 0.37 in 2015 to 0.42 in 2021 but went down to 0.41 in 2023.   Afrobarometer (rounds 7 and 8) also show a downtrend. Earlier surveys in 2014 showed   that most respondents – 67 percent – felt that corruption had increased in the last 12   months. Only 13 percent felt that it had decreased. But in the 7th round in 2017, 72 percent   of respondents believed corruption was decreasing; only 10 percent thought it was   increasing. A government’s own sponsored survey by the PO-PSM & GG showed that   corruption was on a downward trend moving from 67 percent in 2014 to 44 percent in 2017   (URT, 2022).   In terms of governance and institutional accountability, 90.5 percent of respondents   indicated that the level of accountability was high among institutions. About 81 percent of   MDAs had Client Service Charters (CSCs) and believed that they had been instrumental in   improving services to the clients.   International comparisons indicate that Tanzania is somewhere in the middle of the range,   as shown in Figure 15 below, as per Transparency International, in the fight against   corruption. Overall, there has been significant improvement when looked at from the time   the TDV 2025 was prepared. In 2000, the score was 25 out of 100, and in 2021, it was 39   out of 100.   57 | Page   Figure 16: Transparency International Scores in the Fight against Corruption in Tanzania   Source: Transparency International/ Tradingeconomics.com   Likewise, the World Justice Report indicates that Tanzania’s index on fighting corruption   had quadrupled from 0.12 in 2002 to 0.41 in 2022 (Table 21). In that ranking, the country   was ranked 98 out of 140 countries in the absence of corruption, with a score of 0.46,   outshining Kenya (with a 0.45 score and ranked 104th), DR Congo (with a 0.34 score and   ranked 137). Countries in Africa that did better than Tanzania included Rwanda (scored   0.63 and ranked 42nd), South Africa (0.58 score and ranked 54th) and Botswana (0.59 and   ranked 51st).    Tanzania’s PCCA No. 11/2007 has established the mechanism for cooperation with   relevant international and regional organizations in the prevention and combating   corruption. Moreover, Tanzania participates in several international and regional anti  corruption initiatives, projects, and programs. Tanzania is a member of the following   international and regional organizations such as the International Association of Anti  Corruption Authorities (IAACA); the African Union Advisory Board on Corruption, which is   an autonomous organ established within the African Union (AU) in terms of Article 22 of the   African Union Convention on Preventing and Combating Corruption; the Commonwealth   Association of Anti-Corruption Agencies; SADC Anti-Corruption Committee (SACC)   (formed in Kinshasa in 2015); The East African Association of Anti-Corruption Authorities   (EAAACA); and International Corruption Hunters’ Network.   Voice and accountability are essential elements of good governance. Several laws have   been enacted in the country to improve accountability. They include the National Elections   (Presidential and Parliamentary Elections) Regulations, 2020, The National Election Act   (Cap 343 R.E 2015), The Political Parties Act (Cap 258 R.E 2019), The Local Authorities   (Elections) Act, (Cap 292 R.E 2019), The Elections Expenses Act (Cap 278 R.E 2019). A   number of regulations and rules have been promulgated to ensure smooth implementation   of the principal legislations. Notables are the following: the National Elections (Presidential   and Parliamentary Elections) Regulations, 2015; the Election Expenses Regulations, 2010;   the National Elections (Election Petition) Rules, 2010, with the subsequent amendments in   2012 vide the National Elections (Election Petitions) (Amendment) Rules, 2012; the Local   Authorities (Election Petitions) Rules, 2010; and the Local Authorities (Councilors   Elections) Regulations, 2015.   58 | Page   Undertaking Accountability programs, including Open Government Partnership (OGP)   that enhances transparency, accountability, and openness in the conduct of Government   business; African Peer Review Mechanism (APRM) that requires the government’s self  assessment to governance practices and entrenching Decentralization by Devolution (D by   D) across the government with a view to empowering the public.   The Electoral Commission has managed to supervise and coordinate the registration of   voters in presidential and parliamentary elections, conduct the election, review the   boundaries, and demarcate the United Republic into various areas for parliamentary   elections, etc.25. The register of voters has registered Tanzanians, increasing from 8.93   million in 1995 to 29.1 in 2020, and participating in elections, increasing from 76.7 percent   voter turn-out in 1995 to 84.4 percent in 2000, but later decreasing to 67.34 percent in 2015   and 50.72 percent in 2020) (NEC,2023)26 (Figure 17). There are signs of increasing voter   apathy in successive elections since the 2005 election, a matter worth taking note of by the   relevant authorities.   Figure 17: Trend of Citizens Turning Out to Vote for Leaders   Source: NEC   In ensuring government effectiveness, the enactment of the Public Audit Act No. 11 of   2008 strengthened the oversight functions of the Controller and Auditor General (CAG)   over public finance management as in charge of the National Audit Office (NAO). The   CAG’s independence is enshrined in the Constitution of the United Republic of Tanzania of   1977. There have also been deliberate moves to strengthen public procurement functions   through the Public Procurement Regulatory Authority (PPRA), which was established under   the Public Procurement Act No. 21 of 2004 for the purpose of overseeing public   procurement processes and strengthening procurement functions. The e-Government   Agency (e-GA) was established in 2012 to facilitate other government institutions to install   and customize the usage of ICT-related services, including instituting an anti-corruption text   message campaign and establishing conflict resolutions. From 2020, e-GA is an authority   that has already overseen the crafting of different online digital platforms, including those   for budgeting (e.g., SBAS, Plan Rep, HCMIS, IFMS), bill payments (water, electricity, fees.   charges), Registration (job application, school/college), Revenue Collection (POS, EFD)   and in the procurement process (TANePS). Others include GIMIS, MUVU, TeSWS, e  Parliament, e-Ticketing and Cargo System, HCMIS, MAJIIS, GePG, e-Vibali, ERMS, e  25    26    See article 74(6) of the United Republic of Tanzania as amended from time to time.   www.nec.go.tz   59 | Page   Mikutano, GovESB, MGov, e-Barua/GMS, e-Mrejesho etc. These systems minimize   unnecessary costs and corrupt practices, save time, safeguard security, and fasten   processes and procedures.   Political Stability and Absence of Violence   Multiparty System   In May 1992, Tanzania transitioned from single-party rule to a multiparty system, and in   October 1995, elections for the president and members of parliament were conducted for   the first time under this multiparty system. Under the period of TDV 2025, Tanzania is one   of the most politically stable countries among the countries of Africa.   Diplomatic Relations   Diplomatically, since 2001, Tanzania, along with Kenya and Uganda, have comprised the   East African Community (EAC). In striving to strengthen regional cooperation, it entered an   EAC Customs Union that came into effect beginning in January 2005. Furthermore, it   served as the chair country for the SADC for the year 2003. As an important member,   Tanzania played the important role of a mediator in Eastern and Southern Africa. It also   displays diplomatic leadership aimed at achieving peace in Burundi and the DRC to   stabilize the Great Lakes region as a whole27.   Target 4: Learning Society   The Well Educated and Learning Society target envisioned Tanzania as a nation whose   people are ingrained with a developmental mindset and competitive spirit. Accordingly,   these attributes require education and knowledge to critically enable the nation to   effectively utilize knowledge in mobilizing domestic resources to ensure the provision of   people's basic needs and to attain competitiveness in the regional and global economy.    Continuous learning was done at three levels: (a) at the individual level, Tanzanians sought   to acquire requisite skills and knowledge to be able to explore and benefit from the   development opportunities in the competitive labor market; (b) at firm or enterprise level,   and (c) at the government level, learning in terms of best practices, success, lessons   learned–what worked well and what did not work well (challenges) were well integrated in   designing and planning to inform implementation of the various interventions related to the   TDV2025.    In addition, the efforts toward achieving a well-educated and learning society target   included the transition from rote to competency-based learning. Tanzania started to   implement the competence-based curriculum in 2005. As such, most teachers show a   positive attitude toward the paradigm shift from a content-based curriculum to a   competency-based curriculum. In general, the transition from rote to competency-based   learning has had some impact in equipping skills and confidence among the young   population who are exploiting employment potential in both farming and off-farm activities.    27    Fukushi, E. The Social and Political Environmental in Tanzania; Background to the project, at pg. 1   60 | Page   According to stakeholder views, aspects that were scored highest to have contributed to a   learning society included the use of ICT, which has supported the use of online platforms   (15.1%), including the use of conventional and online TV (11%); and increased literacy   levels in the society- which in essence has been contributed by increased schooling   enrollment rates, improved education sector and provision of free schooling (Figure 18).   Figure 18: Scores of aspects (%) that have contributed to building a learning society (N=187)   Source: Field data 2023   Leaning at Personal Level   Overall, Tanzania has made good progress towards the Well Educated and Learning   Society target. According to the TDV 2025 evaluation findings, there are a lot of   achievements in the formal education system. For example, in 2021, Tanzania had 18,553   primary schools with 10.9 million pupils, 5,280 secondary schools with 2.3 million students,   and 49 universities with 240,523 university students in 2022. This aspect is corroborated by   the stakeholder responses shown in Figure 18, which stresses the aspect of education in   encouraging a learning society. As such, these figures are far from the baseline figures in   2000 when TDV 2025 implementation started, where, for example, the University of Dar es   Salaam and Sokoine University of Agriculture (SUA) were the only full-fledged universities   in Tanzania in 2000. As for CSEE school and private candidates in 2009, there were   168,914 and 55,942 candidates, respectively, which were 198 percent and 141 percent   increments compared to the CSEE data in 2005.    In 2000, there were hardly any social media platforms. However, today, Tanzania is among   the top countries in Africa with many social media users. As such, there are approximately   9.9 million WhatsApp users, 6 million Facebook users, 3.15 million YouTube users, and   594,800 Twitter (X) users in Tanzania. In 2022, the daily users of social media were as   follows: Video streaming platform YouTube 2,846,839 users daily, Instagram 2,610,509, Tik   Tok 1,601,392. Other platforms and their average daily usage include SnapChat   (1,040,042), Skype (573,971), Imo (333,976), and Telegram (266,035), as per October   2022 data. The above statistics suggest that Tanzanians are massively exploring learning   opportunities through social media.    This fact was echoed by many respondents of the TDV 2025 evaluation who say that   today, Tanzanians demand knowledge through several means, a culture which has partly   61 | Page   been promoted by TDV 2025. Tanzania has made significant steps in formal education   from elementary schools up to universities since there are a lot of schools, colleges, and   universities constructed during the period of TDV2025. Also, the respondents underscore   the role of free education policy from kindergarten up to advanced level secondary school   as a key milestone that has invigorated Tanzania as a learning society.    Learning at Firm Level   At the firm level, they supported government efforts through contributions to the skills   development level, mostly used for expanding training for vocational education   (spearheaded by VETA and some privately owned colleges). However, there is no formal   data to show that firms had consistently supported their employees to pursue further   knowledge and skills once employed, except for public servants who tended to benefit from   government-sponsored overseas scholarships.    Learning with Public Institutions   Within the public sector, learning in terms of best practices, success, and lessons learned  what worked well and what did not work well (challenges) and what was well integrated in   designing and planning to inform the implementation of the various interventions related to   the TDV2025. This includes documenting some lessons learned. There is plenty of   information documented on learning from the various national strategies, projects and   programs implemented to achieve the vision. Therefore, learning has been used to inform   current and future interventions. Table 22 presents examples of key government   documents that have a section on the aspects of learning.    Table 22: Examples of public documents and programs with aspects of learning   No    Document   1   2   3   The Tanzania Five Year Development Plan   2011/12-2015/66 (FYDP I)   The Tanzania Five-Year Development Plan   2016/17-2020/21 (FYDP II)   The Tanzania Five-Year Development Plan   2021/22-2025/26 (FYDP III)   Section/chapter with aspects of Learning    Review of Vision 2025: Rationale for   Reverting to Systematic Planning   Situation Analysis and Assessment of FYDP I   and MKUKUTA II Implementation   Review of Implementation of The Second   National   Five-Year   2016/17-2020/21   Development   Plan   4   5   6   Education Sector Development Plan    (2016/17 – 2020/21)   Health Sector Strategic Plan July 2021 –   June 2026 (HSSP V)   Agricultural   Sector   Development   Programme Phase II (ASDP II)   (2017/2018–2027/2028)   Key Achievements and Challenges   Emerging Strategic Priorities   ASDP I - Key Challenges   Lessons Learnt from ASDP I   62 | Page   No    7   8   Document   The Zanzibar Strategy For Growth and   Reduction of Poverty: 2010-2015 (ZSGRP   II) MKUZA II   Zanzibar Development    Vision 2050   Source: Author’s review of various documents   3.3.2. Challenges   Target 1: Moral and cultural uprightness   Section/chapter with aspects of Learning    Major Lessons from Cluster I of MKUZA I   Building on our past: Vision 2020    A success story   a) The situation has not changed much from what the authors of TDV 2025 Composite   Goals in 2000 observed in 1999. Apart from the news, it is difficult to know what the   television stations stand for. A large percentage of airtime is devoted to foreign   programs of little or no relevance to Tanzania. Cheap western films, Indian films in   Hindi and even Arabic language programs beamed directly from Dubai are common   features of Tanzania's television. Pop-music and disco shows, commercial dance   troupes, Taarab shows are often on the verge of vulgarity” (Planning Commission 2000:   section 2.4(a), pg.63).   b) As a country, we have not yet succeeded in transforming the mindset of the public on   moral and cultural uprightness, particularly on corruption and ethical behavior, and aid   dependency syndrome.    c) Through globalization assisted by ICT, our society, especially young people, is highly   manipulated and informed by what is observed in social media. Habits and cultures,   such as same-sex cohabitation, also considered abnormal even in foreign countries,   and that were unimaginable 20 years ago, have penetrated society and are openly   discussed as social evils.   d) Technological advancement has also introduced cybercrime, social bullying and   conning new vices in society.   The information from the   literature   above   supported   is   by   stakeholders who were of   the view that among the   leading   reasons   that   contributed to lowering or   eroding societal ethics   and morals included the   influence   of   foreign   culture (21.3%), social   Figure 19: Scores (%) of factors that contributed to lowering the attainment of   upholding moral and cultural uprightness (N=187)   63 | Page   Source: Fieldwork consultation data   media (17.3%), outdated or bad cultural values (14.7%) and corruption (8.6%) (Figure 19).   Target 2-Adherence and respect to the rule of law   According   to   interviewed   stakeholders, the main reasons   scored for the under-performance   in the target to build a society that   adheres to and respects the rule   of law include corruption (34.1%),   poor leadership (14.3%), lack of   knowledge of citizens’ rights   (9.9%) and suppression of   human rights (9.9%) (Figure 19).   The reason given as corruption   (34.1%) can also be manifested   as   selfishness   (3.3%) and   immorality (3.3%), which, if   combined, brings to a total score   of 40.7 percent.   Figure 20: Scores (%) on main reasons for the less impressive   performance of aspect of rule of law (N=187)   Source: Fieldwork consultation data   Different reports have also listed the following as the main challenges in promoting the rule   of law:   a) Corruption has been an incessant problem in the justice system (also cited by key   informants (Figure 19).   b) Lack of capacity in dealing with new types of criminal activity needing specialized   training and knowledge in areas like cyberspace, AI, medical technology, and their   fallout outcomes with criminal propensities.    c) Delays in investigations and constant adjournment of cases, overcrowding in detention   facilities, and misuse of loopholes in plea-bargaining (LHRC, 2022).   d) The language barrier, whereas most of the Tanzanian laws and procedures are in the   English language, prevents most citizens from understanding legal proceedings. The   key informants indirectly mentioned this as a “lack of knowledge” (Figure 24).   e) Inadequate resources   (financial, human, and   retooling)   to   oversight   enable   institutions   such as PCCB and   DCEA to perform their   mandates.    Stakeholders provided   suggestions on how to   overcome the challenges   Figure 21: Scores (%) of suggested solutions to overcome challenges to   enforcing the rule of law (N-187)   Source: Field data 2023.   64 | Page   that led to an unimpressive performance of the aspect of the rule of law. The highest  scoring solution was on providing public civic education (17.8%), strengthening initiatives to   combat corruption (12.9%), and strengthening watchdog and oversight institutions (11.4%)   (Figure 21).   Target 3: Absence of corruption and other vices   a) A public mindset accepting corruption as a way of life doesn't discourage public   servants from engaging in corruption and ethical behavior. Corruption has been an   incessant problem in society.   b) There has been a narrow involvement of key stakeholders, especially the NSAs, in   combating and fighting corruption. Effort was more on the public sector and overlooked   the need to deal with the supply side of corruption initiated by the private sector.   c) Inadequate resources (human, financial and equipment), as well as institutional and   organizational capacity of the key executing agencies.   d) Absence of effective structures for national dialogue over corruption.   e) Political corruption, especially during elections, is yet to be effectively addressed.    f)   Non-compliance with laws, regulations, and procedures because of lenient sanctions,   weak supervision, and incentives. The situation has not been helped by the lack of   continuity, functionality and sustainability of the Integrity Committees that were   established in public sector institutions.   g) Inadequate Monitoring and Evaluation system for programs and initiatives to prevent   and combat corruption.   Target 4: Learning Society   Despite the achievements realized under the learning society target, TDV 2025 evaluation   records several challenges affecting the pace of learning. The evaluation findings via   interviews, discussions, meetings, and consultations with respondents show that the   learning culture among Tanzanians is still low to date, especially learning through reading   books, listening, and watching educational radio and TV programs. Further, there is   influence from undesirable cultural values acquired from materials available on social   media. Most young Tanzanians are not motivated to learn through organized public   meetings called by local leaders. As such, a lot of efforts and incentives like music, drinks,   meals, and allowances must be made for good attendance at the public meetings and   training seminars. Notably, other respondents are of the opinion that several Tanzanians   are ignorant of prohibitive traditions.    65 | Page   Stakeholders   are   listed and scored by   important factors that   have contributed to   the weakening of the   zeal   to   learning   build   a   society,   leading to a lack of   reading (15.4%) and   learning   culture   (8.1%) (Figure 22).   3.4   Figure 22: Scores of leading challenges that weakened the target of building a   learning society (N=187)   Source: Field data 2023   Goal 3: Building an Inclusive and Competitive Economy   The fifth attribute of the   Tanzania Development Vision   2025 is attaining a competitive   economy capable of producing   sustainable and shared growth,   whose main goal is building a   strong   and   competitive   economy. There are five main   targets in attaining that main   goal, namely, a diversified and   semi-industrialized   Figure 23: Scores (%) by key informants of the most impressively   performed targets in building an inclusive and competitive economy   (N=187)   Source: Field data 2023   economy,   macroeconomic stability, a   GDP growth rate of 8 percent   or more, adequate physical   infrastructure for all sectors,   and active competitive player in the regional and world markets. Target areas that received   higher scores from key informants as most impressively performed after 22 years of TDV   2025 implementation include building a semi-industrialized economy (35.7%), provision of   prerequisite infrastructure for transport, energy, water, and communication (32.7%), and   economic diversification (11.6%) (Figure 23).    To track and assess/evaluate progress in the attainment of those targets listed above, there   are a few outcome/performance indicators for every target, which were outlined and   assessed in the sub-sections below.   66 | Page   3.4.1 Target 1: Strong, Diversified, Resilient and Semi-Industrialized   Competitive Economy   The target of building a strong, diversified, resilient, semi-industrialized, competitive   economy entailed building an economy that can effectively cope with the challenges of   development and which can also easily and confidently adapt to the market dynamics and   technological conditions in the regional and global economy. Invariably, it is envisioned that   Tanzania will graduate from a least-developed economy to a middle-income country (MIC)   by the year 2025. Vehicles in achieving this target included the development of the National   Strategy for Growth and Reduction of Poverty (NSGRP), the Tanzania Mini-Tiger Plan   2020 (TMTP 2020) - an industrialization strategy, the Second-Generation Financial Sector   Reforms, and preparation of sector ministries strategic plans. The industrial sector   comprises the following sub-sectors: Mining and Quarrying, Manufacturing, Electricity   Supply, Water Supply, Sewerage and Wastewater Management, and Construction.   Industrial Sector Contribution to Gross Domestic Product (GDP)   Prerequisites for facilitating the building of a semi-industrialized, competitive economy   include the following:   a) The existence of an industrial base implies industries that would provide raw materials   to other industries to manufacture goods.   b) The availability of efficient transportation services (roads, railways, marine, etc.) for the   conveyance of requisite raw materials and manufactured products to the markets.   c) The availability of a sufficient and stable supply of electricity required by manufacturers.   d) The availability of efficient and stable telecommunications: In the contemporary world,   following the digital transformation, telecommunications are imperative in reaching out   to the regional and global markets, as well as in the acquisition and use of the latest   technologies in the industry.   e) Low and stable inflation rates attract investments in industry to ensure commodities are   produced at low costs that translate into competitive prices of the produced   commodities in the markets.   f)   Low-interest rates in the financial markets facilitate the acquisition of the requisite   capital at low cost, hence promoting investment in industry.   The average contribution of the industrial sector to GDP, at current market prices, for   Tanzania Mainland over the last 22 years is shown in the table below (Table 23),   segmented over periods of five years (except for the last three years).   67 | Page   68 | Page   Table 23: Tanzania’s Average Industrial Sector Contribution to GDP, at Current Market Prices    2000-2004 2005-2009 2010-2014 2015-2019 2020-2022   Mainland Tanzania: Industry and Construction   (aggregate) 23.0% 21.5% 22.2% 26.0% 30.1%   Mining and Quarrying  2.3% 3.3% 4.4% 4.8% 7.6%   Manufacturing  10.1% 8.1% 6.8% 8.0% 7.8%   Electricity Supply  2.4% 1.7% 0.8% 0.4% 0.2%   Water Supply, Sewerage, Waste Mngt. 0.6% 0.4% 0.5% 0.4% 0.5%   Construction 7.6% 8.0% 9.6% 12.4% 14.0%   Zanzibar: Industry and Construction   (aggregate) 16.8% 17.1% 17.8% 13.8% 14.1%   Source: The Economic Surveys, various issues      As may be noted from Table 24, the contribution of the industrial sector to overall GDP   exhibited a steady positive trajectory from 2005 to recent years, mainly contributed by   construction and manufacturing sub-sectors. Over the same period, the contribution of the   industrial sector to Zanzibar’s GDP was not encouraging, notwithstanding the relatively   steady performance of the manufacturing sub-sector.      Industrial Sector Growth Rate      The growth of the Tanzania Mainland industrial sector over the past 22 years has exhibited   rising growth rates over time. Notably, Manufacturing, Water Supply, Sewerage and Waste   Management and Construction sub-sectors grew relatively steadily during the period. Table   24 shows the Tanzania Mainland industrial sector growth rates during the period.       Table 24: Tanzania Average Industrial Sector Growth Rates    2000-2004 2005-2009 2010-2014 2015-2019 2020-2022   Tanzania Mainland: Industry and   Construction (aggregated)   9.4% 11.0% 11.9% 12.2% 11.8%    Mining and Quarrying  18.5% 18.8% 25.7% 24.5% 21.4%    Manufacturing  8.1% 9.1% 10.3% 10.8% 11.1%    Electricity Supply  7.8% 8.4% 6.9% 8.1% 7.8%    Water Supply, Sewerage, Waste Mngt. 4.6% 4.8% 5.2% 6.2% 6.8%    Construction 9.6% 12.8% 14.0% 14.0% 13.2%   Zanzibar: Industry and Construction   (aggregated)1   7.9% 11.3% 13.4% 11.3% 10.4%   Source: The Economic Surveys, various issues      Note: 1In Zanzibar, just like in the mainland, the dominating activities are related to mining   and quarrying (10.3% in 2020-2022) and construction (22.8% in 2020-2022). Manufacturing   grew at an average of 5.2 percent in 2015-2019 but declined to -0.4 percent between 2020   and 2022. This is compared to a growth rate of 2.8 percent in 2000-2004.   Looking at key factors that influence industrial development, it is observed that during the   entire past 22 years of implementing the TDV2025, the nation did not fare well in   parameters of growth rate, contribution to GDP, borrowing interest rate and contribution to   foreign exchange earnings, save for the inflation rates, which were held at single digit for a   long time. The interest rate spread remained high for almost the entire period, and the   supply of electricity left much to be desired. The efficiency of the transportation system,   with over-dependence on roads due to a dilapidated railway network, remained below   optimum levels, hence contributing to the escalation of operation costs in the industry, in   effect eroding the competitiveness of manufactured commodities.   Diversification and Product Mix from Established Industries   The information in Figure 24 reveals that 50 percent of exports are dominated by mineral   products, most of which are in raw form or semi-processed. Besides the re-export of   mineral fuels (3.8%), fertilizers (1.6%) and iron/steel (1.1%), the rest of the exports are   dominated by mostly unprocessed cereals (4.2%), edible fruits, nuts, citrus and melons   (3.8%), oilseeds (3.4%), edible vegetables and roots/tubers (3.1%). The only agro-products   exports with significant value addition are beverages (coffee, tea, etc.) (3.8%) and tobacco   (3.1%) (Figure 24).    Figure 24: Basket of Tanzania’s Exports in 2022 by Commodities   Source: Tanzania Exports By Category (tradingeconomics.com)   Although one can notice some form of diversification of the range of manufactured products   such as salt, Sulphur, lime, plaster, and cement (2.5%), wood and articles of wood (1.5%),   beverages and spirits (1.3%), their total value compared to unprocessed exported goods is   insignificant.    69 | Page   Emphasized   observation   The performance of the industrial sector in view of the evidence on its growth   rate, the mix of goods produced, and its contribution to GDP over the past 22   years is not convincing enough that the target for attaining a diversified and   semi-industrialized economy will be attained by 2025.    3.4.2 Target 2: Macroeconomic stability   The target of macroeconomic stability was set to underline the importance of low inflation   and basic macroeconomic balances to economic development. Key macroeconomic   indicators that characterize the foregoing include inflation rates, fiscal and monetary   indicators (domestic revenue, fiscal deficits, money supply, interest rates, etc.), foreign   exchange rates, domestic credit, etc.   Inflation   In both Tanzania mainland and Zanzibar, inflation exhibited a similar pattern over the entire   period of implementing the Vision. Nonetheless, Zanzibar’s inflation numbers were slightly   higher. Starting with single-digit inflation rates in the first five years, the rates shot up to   double-digits, reaching 20.6 percent in Zanzibar in 2008 and 16.1 percent in Tanzania   Mainland in 2012, before easing to progressively declining single-digits again for the   remaining period to date (Figure 25).   Figure 25: The Trend of Inflation in Tanzania Mainland and Zanzibar   Source: The Economic Surveys, various issues   Point of   Emphasis   However, unfolding global geopolitics influenced by the Russia-Ukraine war, the   weakening of the US Dollars, and the response by OPEC countries, led by Saudi   Arabia, to cut down oil production pose a challenge to the government of Tanzania   on its ability to refrain from pursuing monetary and fiscal policies that may trigger   inflation, deplete foreign exchange reserves, and increase government debt burden   to unsustainable levels contrary to the TDV2025 aspirations.   70 | Page   Interest Rates   Data on interest rates in commercial banks during the period demonstrates that the interest   rate spread (the gap between savings deposit rates and lending rates) has consistently   been expanding over time, with lending rates rising while the savings deposit rates   continued to decline (Figure 26). While higher spreads translate into higher profits for the   lenders (banks), borrowers experience higher costs on borrowed funds, thereby   discouraging prospective investors, especially SMEs. On the other hand, consistently   declining deposit rates discourage domestic savings. The declining trend-line of net savings   is consistent with declining savings rates during the period.   Figure 26: The Trend of Interest Rates In Tanzania Mainland and Zanzibar   Source: The Economic Surveys, various issues   Money and Credit Developments   Generally, for the past 22 years, developments in money supply (extended broad money –   M3) and growth in credit to the private sector exhibited a downward trend, reflecting   declining liquidity in the economy (Figure 27). In effect, the growth of credit to the private   sector has followed the same pattern. Invariably, access to investible funds has not been   very encouraging.   Figure 27: Trends in the Growth of Domestic Credit and Money Supply   Source: The Economic Surveys, various issues   71 | Page   After witnessing an expansion in credit to the private sector, during the early years of   implementing the Vision, the trend subsequently nosedived, maintaining a generally   declining path, hitting the floor at 1.7 percent in 2017, before regaining an upward trajectory   to date, and probably through the end of the period.    Government Finance   Domestically, resource mobilization for implementing TDV2025 was done through the   Government Budget based on the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF). On   Tanzania mainland, the Government’s revenue effort gradually improved over time during   the implementation of the Vision. Starting at around 12 percent in FY 2000/01, domestic   revenue effort rose to 14.9 percent by FY 2022/23 on account of increased domestic   revenue collections, both tax and non-tax. On the other hand, Government total   expenditure showed a slightly declining trend during the period, in effect narrowing the   fiscal deficit (both with and excluding grants) (Figure 28).   In Zanzibar, the Government’s domestic revenue effort showed a declining trend from 17.4   percent in FY 2000/01 to mid-period I 2011/22, registering 8.6 percent and subsequently   rose to 17.9 percent in 2021/22. Total Government expenditure exhibited an erratic pattern,   like an unsmoothed sine-curve, during the period. This implies that Government   expenditures were not aligned with the domestic revenue effort. Invariably, even the fiscal   deficit followed a similar pattern. The path of the Government’s fiscal deficit (both before   and after grants) appears to be erratic. This is indicative of the fact that the Government did   not implement its fiscal policy well.   Figure 28: Trends in Government Revenue And Expenditure – Tanzania Mainland   Source: The Economic Surveys, various issues   72 | Page   National Debt Developments   Borrowing is an important, inescapable source of funds required in financing development   programs. With the objective of strengthening debt management, both external and   domestic, the Government launched a National Debt Strategy in August 2002. The salient   features of the strategy included the following:   a) Tightening approval procedures for foreign borrowing.   b) Amendments to the Government Loans, Guarantees and Grants Act, 1974.   c) Restricting external financing to concessional borrowing for high-priority programs and   budget support.   d) Restricting domestic financing to rolling over maturing debt (T-Bills and T-Bonds) for   financing specific development projects.   e) Rationalizing the legal and institutional framework for debt management.   In managing domestic debt, the Government has been implementing a policy of non  accumulation of arrears by converting un-securitized domestic liabilities into marketable   securities (5-, 7-, 10-, and 20-year Treasury Bonds), which are listed on the Dar es Salaam   Stock Exchange (DSE) (Figure 29). This has also contributed to the revitalization of   activities in the DSE.   Figure 29: Trends in National Debt Stock   Source: The Economic Surveys, various issues   73 | Page   In the first year of implementing the Vision in 2000, the national debt stock stood at US   Dollars 8,773.9 million, out of which US Dollars 7,624.8 million was external debt, which   declined over time to US Dollars 6,158.8 million, out of which US Dollars 4,660.9 million   was external debt, by the year 2006. Subsequently, the national debt stock rose gradually,   reaching US Dollars 38,265.6 million, out of which US Dollars 27,832.5 million was external   debt by the year 2022. The increasing debt stock over time reflects the importance and   increasing need for external financing during the period of implementing Vision.    The external debt to GDP ratio was very high during the early years of implementing Vision   (between 2000 and 2006). However, subsequently, that ratio hovered between 27.7   percent and 36.6 percent, which is below the debt sustainability (DSA) threshold of 40   percent. This implies that external borrowing to finance the Government programs in   implementing its development plans did not compromise the country’s debt sustainability   (Figure 30).   Foreign Exchange   As may be noted from the steep gradient of the line graph (Figure 30), it is evident that the   competitiveness of our commodities on the world market has suffered immensely from   unfavorable foreign exchange. Tanzania has weathered through such consistent increases   in   foreign exchange rates by providing for such changes in its development   programs/plans, i.e., providing for foreign exchange fluctuations. Nonetheless, the efficacy   of such provisions hinges on the precision of projections/prediction of the path/direction of   changes in foreign exchanges.   Figure 30: The Trend of Exchange Rates of the US Dollar to the Tanzania Shilling   Source: The Economic Surveys, various issues   The Central Bank, through its monetary policy, intervenes in the foreign exchange market   to smooth out adverse volatility in the exchange rates. Nonetheless, notwithstanding the   Bank of Tanzania’s efforts, exchange rates for major currencies, such as the US Dollar,   could not be stabilized for long periods due to external economic shocks that cannot be   controlled domestically, such as drastic increases in world market prices for major imported   74 | Page   commodities, including fossil fuels, agricultural fertilizers, mechanized tools and equipment,   medications, etc. Invariably, with increasing exchange rates, the local costs rise   commensurately, leading to increased cost of production in the domestic economy, as well   as the cost of living. The increased cost of production in the domestic economy adversely   impacts the competitiveness of domestically produced commodities.    The External Sector   During the first half (up to the year 2011) of implementing the Vision, both exports and   imports increased substantially, rising from 14.4 percent and 22.7 percent of GDP in 2000,   respectively, to 31.1 percent and 50.6 percent of GDP respectively by 201, after which both   declined gradually to 15.8 percent and 22.0 percent of GDP respectively, by 2022. Both the   Trade Balance and Current Account Balance followed a similar path, i.e., starting by   expanding (widening) from -7.7 percent and -5.3 percent of GDP in 2000 respectively, to   19.9 percent and -16.8 percent of GDP respectively by 2011 and subsequently gradually   narrowing to -9.2 percent and -1.3 percent of GDP in 2022, respectively, an improvement.   Figure 31 shows the trends of exports and imports of goods and services, as well as the   trade and current account balances during the period.   Figure 31: Exports and Imports of Goods and Services   Source: The Economic Surveys, various issues   With the improvement in the current account balance, Tanzania has accumulated   substantial foreign reserves during the period, sufficient to finance, on average, around five   months of imports, consistent with the macroeconomic policy framework for the period.   Figure 32 shows the trend of FDI inflows into Tanzania during the period.   75 | Page   Figure 32: Foreign Reserves (Months of Imports)   Source: The Economic Surveys, various issues   Inflows of Foreign Direct Investments (FDI) were on the increase during the first 13 years,   from US Dollars 463.4 million in 2000 and peaking in 2013 to US Dollars 2,130.9 million. In   subsequent years to date, the inflow of FDI slowed gradually to US Dollars 1,190.5 million   in 2021 (Figure 33). In proportion to the Gross Capital Formation, the inflow of FDI has   followed a similar pattern, implying the contribution of FDI to Gross Capital Formation   (GCF) has been on the decline, more pronounced from 2010 (Figure 33). Figure 34 shows   FDI inflows as a proportion of Gross Capital Formation during the period.   Figure 33: Gross Capital Formation and Foreign Direct Investments   Source: The Economic Surveys, various issues   76 | Page   Figure 34: The Trend of FDI Flows (% Of Gross Capital Formation)   Source: The Economic Surveys, various issues   Point of   Emphasis   Although the rate of FDI flow showed some declining trend from 2013, that did not   adversely affect the rate of capital formation, which has been on the rise at a more   pronounced rate since 2010. This is an indication of the increasing role of domestic   capital in propelling economic growth.    3.4.3 Target 3: GDP Growth Rate    The Tanzania Development Vision 2025 set the target for an annual GDP growth of 8-9 by   2025, which was anticipated to rise to between 6-7 percent during the first 5 years 2001  2005 and subsequently to 8–9 percent through 2025. Empirical evidence shows that, while   the targets for the first 5 years were realized, the country’s GDP growth rate for the   subsequent 6 years to 2011 hovered around seven percent, driven mainly by growth in   services and industry. When weighed against their respective sectoral contributions to the   overall GDP, services contributed the most, with tourism and horticulture leading in   Zanzibar. In subsequent years, GDP growth eased slightly, and with the advent of COVID  19 in 2019/20, it dipped further to below 5.0 percent, following the adverse impact of the   pandemic on services and industry. In view of the foregoing, the GDP growth target of 8-9   percent was missed, and it is most unlikely to be realized in the remaining period of 3 years   to 2025. Figure 35 shows the sectoral and overall GDP growth during the period of   implementing Vision 2025.   77 | Page   Figure 35: The Trend of GDP Growth in Tanzania Mainland   Source: The Economic Surveys, various issues   Figure 36 highlights that the services sector contributed most to overall GDP, and the   contribution of Industry and construction has been expanding gradually over time, with the   share of the agricultural sector exhibiting a corresponding decline (Figure 35).   Figure 36: Per Capita GDP - Tanzania Mainland   Source: The Economic Surveys, various issues   In Zanzibar, the services sector, largely driven by tourism, is the largest contributor to the   island’s GDP. The sector comprises about 50 percent of the GDP. The trend of relative   contributions to GDP growth by sector during the period of implementing Zanzibar Vision   2020 shows the contribution of the services sector is higher compared to that of Tanzania   Mainland since it is above 50 percent. The agricultural sector’s contribution (26-28%) is   larger relative to that of industry (about 20%). The Zanzibar Vision 2020 had targeted GDP   growth of 9 – 10 percent. However, the average growth rate of 5.0 percent during the   period fell short of the set target till the end of the implementation period in 2020, although   it scored the highest growth of 7 percent in 2019.   One of the aspirations of the Tanzania Vision 2025 was to build a strong economy   comparable to middle-income countries at per capita income of US Dollars 3,000 or more,   on the basic assumption that the population growth rate would decelerate gradually from   78 | Page   the then 2.8 percent to 2.5 percent during 2001 – 2005, 2.2 percent during 2005 - 2010 and   2.0 percent. The deceleration of the population growth rates, both on Tanzania mainland   and Zanzibar, was not realized and apparently rose to 2.9 percent, rising further to 3.2 and   3.7 percent on Tanzania mainland and Zanzibar, respectively. The increase in per capita   income (GDP in nominal terms) was only sufficient to reach the lower middle-income   threshold of US Dollars 1,036 by July 2020, when the World Bank declared Tanzania to   have achieved that threshold. It is improbable that the targeted US Dollars 3,000 is   achievable by 2025.   3.4.4 Target 4: Adequate Level of Physical Infrastructure   In order to build a strong competitive economy, with a diversified and semi-industrialized   economy with a substantial industrial sector comparable to typical middle-income countries,   the country would require an adequate level of physical infrastructure or economic services,   including transport (roads, railway, marine transport, etc.), communications and energy.   The country has made considerable efforts during the implementation period of the Vision   to improve its infrastructure, which includes railways, roads, energy, ports, and air   transport.    Roads Network   Figure 37: Tanzania Road Network In Good Condition (Paved/Gravel)   Source: The Economic Surveys, various issues   Figure 37 shows the road network in Tanzania that is in good condition, i.e., paved and/or   gravel surfaced. As may be noted from the chart, the road network deteriorated   substantially by 2010 and the subsequent years, through 2020, when major rehabilitation   road works were initiated. Indeed, roads, primarily rural/regional roads, will require special   attention in terms of rehabilitation works for currently deteriorated roads, as well as opening   other parts of the country by constructing new roads.   79 | Page   The railway subsector is one of the key inland transport modes in terms of transporting bulk   cargo to neighboring and landlocked countries. Figure 38 shows trends in cargo handling in   the Tanzania railway network (TRC and TAZARA). While the current TRC railway has   undergone significant rehabilitation, a new modern standard gauge railway (SGR) line is   under construction, traversing the country from the east to the west and up north towards   Lake Victoria. On completion, the railway line will substantially revamp railway   transportation in the country, using high-speed electric locomotives. The investment will   therefore increase the railway network by 1,219 km (Dar -es- Salaam to Mwanza line.   Figure 38: Trends In Cargo Handling By The Tanzania Railway Network   Source: The Economic Surveys, various issues   The deterioration of the railway network is manifested in the decline of its cargo handling   capacity over time. Passenger handling also exhibited a declining trend, save for a spike in   2018, following the introduction of the Dar es Salaam city commuter train services. Figure   39 shows passenger handling in the Tanzania railway network (TRC and TAZARA).   80 | Page   Figure 39: Trends in Passenger Handling in the Tanzania Railway Network   Source: The Economic Surveys, various issues   Water Transport   With the improvements of the TPA ports (Dar es Salaam, Tanga and Mtwara) in adopting   the use of modern container handling equipment, Tanzania was able to reduce the   container dwell time from 13.3 days as of 2010/11 to 10.3 days in 2014/15, resulting in a   substantial increase in cargo handling at the ports. Despite these improvements, efficiency   is still below the internationally acceptable standard of a maximum of 3 days. Figure 40   shows the trend in cargo traffic at TPA ports.   In the future, there will be a need to further scale up investment in physical infrastructure   after reviewing the current progress and identifying challenges and financing mechanisms   because infrastructure projects require vast amounts of resources.   Figure 40: Cargo Traffic at TPA Ports   Source: The Economic Surveys, various issues   81 | Page   Energy   Generation and sales of electricity in Tanzania have been increasing over time during the   whole period of implementing Tanzania Vision 2025, implying the consumption (or access   to) of electricity has been increasing. With the discovery of vast gas deposits, the country   supplemented hydropower with gas-powered generation of electricity. The Julius Nyerere   Hydropower Project (JNHPP) is expected to add 2,015 MW to the national power grid by   next year (2024), which should substantially raise the supply of electricity in the country,   highly needed for the industrialization drive. The generation and sales of electricity by the   Tanzania Electricity Supply Company (TANESCO) are shown in Figure 41.   Figure 41: Generation and Sales of Electricity   Source: The Economic Surveys, various issues   Source: The Economic Surveys, various issues   Investment to improve electricity supply in Zanzibar involved the installation of a new   submarine cable from Mainland Tanzania to Fumba (Unguja) and Ras Mkumbuu (Pemba)   with a capacity of 100 MW and 20 MW, respectively. The old submarine cable of 45 MW in   Unguja was set as a reserve. There was also some strengthening of electricity   infrastructure by constructing new distribution centres at Mtoni (2*25 MVA 22/11 kV),   Mwanyanya (2*5 MVA, 22/11kV) and Welezo (2*5 MVA, 22/11kV).   82 | Page   Real Estate and Improved Shelter    Real estate development and ensuring improved and affordable shelter for Tanzania was   envisaged to improve as part of the country’s development agenda consistent with Goal 11   of the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), "Sustainable Cities and   Communities," which aims to make cities and human settlements more inclusive, safe,   resilient, and sustainable. It is also complying with Africa Union’s Agenda 2063, seeking to   have "modern, affordable, and livable habitats" for 75 percent of households by 2035 (AU,   2015). TDV2025 identified interventions needed towards the provision and availability of   adequate housing. These included improving the set-up and management of urban growth,   developing an effective strategy for the development of the housing sector, enhancing the   provision of housing services in the rural and urban areas, enhancing the involvement of   the private sector in developing the housing sector, improving land surveying and allocation   of plots and the provision of essential services to surveyed areas’ providing affordable cost   of building materials and services raising the level research and development in the areas   of low-cost housing construction and appropriate technology for the housing sector, and,   providing adequate housing loans at competitive lending rates. The 3rd FYDP added the   dimensions of upgrading and scaling up an Integrated Land Management Information   System, mainstreaming land management and planning systems in other sectoral   development plans and promoting the use of ICT in land surveying and titling.   Real Estate contribution to GDP   Housing in Tanzania is dominated by individual homebuilders, who account for over 70   percent of the total supply28. The rest is catered for by the public sector through local   governments, the National Housing Corporation (NHC), the Tanzania Building Agency   (TBA), the Watumishi Housing Company (WHC), and pension funds such as the National   Social Security Fund (NSSF), and by residential private developers. Tanzania’s housing   demand (affordable housing) is estimated at 200,000 housing units per annum, with an   existing housing deficit of 3,000,000 housing units. In 2019, real estate contributed 3.1   percent to Tanzania’s real GDP, with USD 1.5 billion in 2019, compared to USD 1.2 billion   in 2015, an increase of 25 percent. In comparison, the contribution of real estate to GDP in   Zanzibar increased from 5.2 percent in 2000 to 7.7 percent in 2019.   Access to improved shelter by citizens   According to the Household Budget Survey (HBS) report for 2017-18, the use of modern   roofing, wall, and flooring materials has increased over time. As illustrated in Figure 42, the   proportion of households with modern roofing materials increased from 26 percent in   1991/92 to 84 percent in 2017/18. Similarly, the percentage for wall materials increased   from 21 percent to 79 percent, while flooring materials increased from 16 percent to 51   percent over the same reporting period.   28 https://www.tanzaniainvest.com/construction/realestate   83 | Page   Figure 42: Percentage of Households with Houses Built with Modern Materials by Type of Material, Tanzania   Mainland, 1991-92 to 2017-18 HBS   Source: HBS, 2017-18   Further analysis indicates that both males and females are similar in terms of modernizing   their houses, partly reflecting the government's efforts to empower women through various   programs. In terms of a rural-urban comparison, the rural population generally lags their   urban counterparts in housing modernization, suggesting the need for equal focus in this   area.   Table 25: Percentage of Households with Houses Built with Modern Materials by Type of material, Sex and   Rural-Urban: Tanzania Mainland, 2017-18 HBS   Characteristic   Modern Material For   Roof   Sex of Head of Household   Wall   Floor   Male   83.9   83.9   Female   84.4   84.4   51   51   Rural/Urban   Rural   76.6   70.5   Urban   97.6   94   32.1   85.6   Source: HBS, 2017-18   Significant regional disparities in the level of modernized houses are also notable. Regions   such as Dar-es-Salaam, Kilimanjaro, Songwe, Simiyu, and Ruvuma stand out for having   relatively highly modernized houses compared to regions like Arusha, Pwani, Lindi, Kagera,   Tanga and Manyara. Overall, the type of flooring material shows the lowest level of   modernization,   while   roofing   material   is   the   most highly modernized.   84 | Page   Figure 43Percentage of Households with Houses Built with Modern Materials by Type of Material and Regions   Tanzania Mainland, 2017-18 HBS   Source: Author’s analysis based on HBS, 2017-18   In terms of the use of modern building materials, Zanzibar outperforms the mainland in   various categories. In the year 2019/20, the proportion of people with modern flooring   materials in Zanzibar was 83.9 percent, compared to 51 percent on the mainland in   2017/18 HBS. Zanzibar also had 82.7 percent with modern walls, while the mainland had   79 percent. Additionally, Zanzibar's roof materials were modern for 89.5 percent of the   population, as opposed to 84 percent on the mainland (RGZ, 2020). Just as is the case on   the mainland, urban areas outperform rural areas in terms of housing modernization using   all types of materials.   3.4.5. Target 5: An Active, Competitive Player in the Regional and World   Markets   Tanzania is an active member and beneficiary of a number of regional and global   groupings and arrangements/agreements, including the East African Community (EAC), the   Southern Africa Development Community (SADC), the Preferential Trade Area (PTA) for   Eastern and Southern Africa, World Trade Organization (WTO), General Agreement Tariffs   and Trade (GATT), the African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA) of the US, Everything   But Arms (EBA) program of the EU, New Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD),   African Peer Review Mechanism (APRM), etc. These regional and global groupings and   arrangements/agreements provide an opportunity for the country to face trade and   economic development challenges, such as accessing regional and global markets on   favorable and/or preferential terms to the country’s benefit. Invariably, the member   countries implement sound macroeconomic policies and business-friendly reforms aimed at   putting the respective member countries on a sustainable economic growth path.   85 | Page   Figure 44: Exports to Regional and Global Markets   Source: The Economic Surveys, various issues   As may be noted from Figure 44, most exports are destined for Asia (China, Japan, India,   UAE, Hong Kong, etc.), followed by the European Union (EU) and the Southern Africa   Development Community (SADC). At the same time, most imports (Figure 45) also come   from the Asian block, followed by the EU and Other countries. It is important to note that   Tanzania exports more to SADC than it imports from that block, and it imports more from   the Asian block than it exports to that block. To attain favorable terms of trade, Tanzania   will need to scale up the production of its commodities that have a ready market in the   Asian and EU blocks.   Figure 45: Imports From Regional and Global Markets   Source: The Economic Surveys, various issues   86 | Page   87 | Page   88 | Page   Table 26: Performance Indicators Matrix for the Fifth Attribute of TDV2025   ATTRIBUTE FIVE:    A competitive economy   capable of producing   sustainable and shared   growth   Performance Indicators Status in 2000/01 Status in 2015/16 Status in 2022/23 Likely Outturn   by 2025/26   Prospects for   attainment of   targets by 2025   Target 1:   Diversified and semi  industrialized economy with   a substantial industrial sector,   comparable to typical   middle-income countries.   (i) Contribution of the industrial sector to GDP    (ii) Per Capita GDP (Tshs.)    (iii)Per Capita GDP (US Dollars)         ▪ 17.9%   ▪ 248,225    ▪ 276.8         ▪ 24.9%   ▪ 2,168,056    ▪ 953.4         ▪ 31.0%   ▪ 2,757,573    ▪ 1,226.2         ▪ 33.0%   ▪ 3,640,000   ▪ 1,400      Target 2:   Achieve macroeconomic   stability, manifested by a low   inflation rate and basic   macroeconomic balances.      (i) Inflation rate p.a.   (ii) Interest Rates   ● Lending   ● Deposits   ● Interest spread   (iii)Money Supply (M3) growth   (iv )Credit to Private Sector growth   (v) Government Finance    (% GDP)   ● Domestic Revenues   ● Expenditure   ● Fiscal Deficit    (vi) Foreign exchange rates (Tshs/US$)   (vii)National debt  (%GDP)   ● External Debt Stock (%GDP)   ● External Debt Service (%Exports)   ● Domestic Debt Stock (%GDP)   (viii)The external sector   ● Exports   ● Imports   ● Trade Balance   ● Current Account Balance   ● Foreign Reserves   (Months of imports)   ● FDI (% Gross Capital Formation)   ▪   5.9%   ▪   19.1%    ▪    7.1%    ▪    12.0%    ▪    21.7%   ▪   22.3 %         ▪ 12.0%   ▪ 16.9%   ▪ -1.4%   ▪ TZS 800.4       ▪  88.7%   ▪ 83.9%   ▪ 6.8%   ▪ 9.7%      ▪ 14.4%   ▪ 22.7%   ▪ -7.7%   ▪ -5.3%      ▪ 5.7   ▪ 27.1%      ▪ 5.2%   ▪ 16.0%   ▪  3.4%    ▪ 12.6%    ▪ 3.4%    ▪ 7.2%         ▪ 13.9%   ▪ 17.5%   ▪ -3.4%   ▪ 2,177.1       ▪ 45.7%   ▪ 36.1%   ▪ 10.4%   ▪ 9.7%      ▪ 17.8%   ▪ 20.0%   ▪ -7.5%   ▪ -5.6%      ▪ 3.8   ▪ 4.7%      ▪ 4.3%   ▪ 16.2%   ▪ 1.7%   ▪ 14.5%   ▪ 11.6%   ▪ 22.5%         ▪ 14.9%   ▪ 18.7%   ▪ -3.3%   ▪ 2,302.4      ▪ 50.5%   ▪ 36.8%   ▪ 13.9%   ▪ 13.8%      ▪ 15.8%   ▪ 22.0%   ▪ -9.2%   ▪ -1.3%      ▪ 6.4   ▪ 3.9%         ▪ 4.0%                        ▪ 14.5%   ▪ 16.3%   ▪ -1.3%   ▪ 2,600          89 | Page   ATTRIBUTE FIVE:    A competitive economy   capable of producing   sustainable and shared   growth   Performance Indicators Status in 2000/01 Status in 2015/16 Status in 2022/23 Likely Outturn   by 2025/26   Prospects for   attainment of   targets by 2025   Target 3:    An annual GDP growth rate   of 8% or more          (i) GDP growth rates    (ii) Sectoral growth rates   ● Agriculture   ● Industry and Construction   ● Services    (iii) Per capita GDP (US$)    (iv) Tanzania population distribution    (v) Population growth rates   ▪ 4.9%      ▪ 4.5%   ▪ 4.5%   ▪ 5.4%   ▪ 276.8   ▪ 32,844,350    ▪ 3.1%   ▪ 6.2%      ▪ 5.4%   ▪ 9.7%   ▪ 6.3%   ▪ 953.4   ▪ 49,981,327    ▪ 2.7%   ▪ 4.9%      ▪ 3.3%   ▪ 5.5%   ▪ 5.2%   ▪ 1,226.2   ▪ 61,741,120    ▪ 3.2%   ▪ 6.0%               ▪ 1,400   ▪ 67,859,959    ▪ 3.2%      Target 4:    Adequate level of physical   infrastructure (transportation,   energy, etc.) needed to cope   with the requirements of the   Vision in all sectors.         (i) Transportation    ● Roads (length-km)   o (In good condition)   ●  Railway (length-km)   o TRC   o TAZARA   ●  Marine (Freight)-Tons   (ii) Electric power (GHW)   ● Generation   ●  Sales    ▪    ▪ 4,152         ▪ 2,721   ▪ 1,860   ▪  3,204,000       ▪   2,484.0    ▪   1,913.0    ▪    ▪ 5,432         ▪ 2,707   ▪ 1,860   ▪ 14,983,000      ▪ 6,990.7    ▪ 5,871.5       ▪ 12,644         ▪ 2,707   ▪ 1,860   ▪ 22,061      ▪ 9,064.9   ▪ 7,729.6               ▪ 3,926      90 | Page   ATTRIBUTE FIVE:    A competitive economy   capable of producing   sustainable and shared   growth   Performance Indicators Status in 2000/01 Status in 2015/16 Status in 2022/23 Likely Outturn   by 2025/26   Prospects for   attainment of   targets by 2025   Target 5:    An active, competitive player   in the regional and world   markets, with adequate   capacity to articulate and   promote national interests   and to adjust quickly to   regional and global market   shifts.    (i) Regional Integration    (ii) Global arrangements and      agreements   (iii) Regional/global Trade      ▪ Tanzania’s   share in World   trade is small   and declining   ▪ Trade in the   World market   confined to   primary   products   ▪ Lack of   competitiveness   in both   traditional and   non-traditional   exports   ▪ Tanzania pulls   out of   COMESA, but   continues to   trade with   COMESA   member   countries   ▪ Tanzania an   active member   of the East   African   Community   (EAC) and the   Southern   Africa   Development   Community   (SADC)   ▪ Trade with the    ▪ Asian block   (China, Japan,   India, UAE,   Hong Kong,   etc.)      ▪ With the war   between   Ukraine and   Russia that   has been   going on for a   period of more   than a year   and half now,   regional, and   global   alliances are   shifting and   the global   markets have   been jolted.   Tanzania   adversely   impacted.   ▪ The US Dollar   as a global   currency is   threatened   with the   emergency of   initiatives to   create an   alternative   currency. The   future is not   promising.          Legend   Likely to reach the target by 2025    Substantial progress, but unlikely to reach the target by 2025    Unlikely to reach the target by 2025       91 | Page   3.4.6 Challenges   Interviewed key informants scored the highest failure to promote industrial development   (31.8%), providing favorable macro-economic stability (19.6%) and infrastructure (9.3%) as   aspects that failed to perform impressively (Figure 46).   Figure 46: Scores of aspects (%) in economic management that were least impressive (N=187)   Source: Field data 2023   a) Target 1: Diversified and Semi-industrialized Economy: (i) Poor performance of the   agricultural sector, which provides about 65 percent of the raw materials; (ii) both   predictable volumes and quality are a problem; (iii) Inadequate power; (iv) Stiff   competition from cheap imports; and, (v) inadequately skilled labor.   b) Target 2: Macro-economic Stability: (i) Low productivity resulting in low revenue   performance; (ii) poor performance of external sector resulting in high negative current   account balance; (iii) continued rapid expansion of the informal sector, which undercuts   the revenue base, curtail progress in revenue mobilization and ultimately translate into   high borrowing; (iv) expansive public expenditure coupled with low domestic revenue   effort translating into high; and, (v) domestic and foreign borrowing.   c) Target 3: GDP Growth rate of 8 percent or more: Low performance of real sectors   and, in particular, agriculture and industry.   d) Target 4: Adequate infrastructure for all sectors: (i) Inadequate financial resources to   fund the infrastructure gap; and (ii) slow progress in implementing PPP projects.   92 | Page   PART FOUR   4.0   4.1   ASSESSMENT EFFECTIVENESS OF TDV2025 DESIGN AND   IMPLEMENTATION APPROACHES   An Overview   This chapter presents the evaluation findings and rating of the performance of TDV2025   attributes and the overall performance of Vision. The evaluation team relied on information   gathered through document review of reports of designs, implementation, and evaluations of   interventions such as policies, five-year development plans, strategic national projects, and   programs, among other interventions that were implemented to achieve the vision. Also, the   team applied information and data gathered from the field through KIIs, FGD, and zonal   workshops. Based on the above information, the evaluation team established ratings that   gauge the extent of the performance of the vision.    Also, the evaluation team has relied on the above information to make a general evaluation   of the vision in terms of its relevance, coherence, effectiveness, and efficiency of   interventions implemented to achieve the Vision, and impact and sustainability of the   interventions and results beyond the period of the vision. A Likert Scale of five points   (1=lowest, 5=highest) has been used to establish performance rates (1=To a very low   extent, 2=to a low extent, 3=average, 4=to a large extent, and a 5=very large extent).   4.2   Overall Assessment TDV2025   4.2.1. Design    According to the findings, the TDV2025 design was scored “average”, implying generally   satisfactory (Table 27). Primarily, the design focused on goals that have remained relevant   for the entire period of the vision. However, there are several gaps in the design, including   the omission of some targets and indicators to monitor the performance of the vision. Some   critical issues that were elaborated in the Composite Development Goals, such as the   environment/climate change and development of the blue economy, were not included   among the three main strategic goals of TDV2025. Also, the vision design didn’t integrate a   robust framework for the monitoring and evaluation of the Vision. For example, the   evaluation team faced challenges in establishing baseline data for the purpose of comparing   the situation before and the situation after the implementation of the vision. Moreover, the   design of TDV25 lacked an explicit communication strategy, and the findings show that most   of the respondents became aware of the vision when it was already implemented for 15   years.   4.2.2. Implementation   Overall, TDV2025 implementation scored an average rating (Table 27). There has been   good progress in social sectors, especially in the provision of education, health services and   water. The evaluation findings show that the implementation of TDV25 appears to have   suffered from a lack of strong institutional coordination due partly to shifting roles and   93 | Page   influence of the National Planning Commission (NPC) as the Secretariat for TDV2025   Implementation. Consequently, there was no consistency in pursuing to ensure the   availability of adequate funding for national programs and flagship projects earmarked as   important for the realization of TDV2025 goals. The lack of an elaborate national financing   framework exacerbated the problem of a coordinated implementation framework. Each   institution drew its programs, regardless of what others were doing, sometimes even in the   same sector. Some innovative approaches in the utilization of financial resources, such as   the Big Results Now (BRN), were abandoned halfway. There was also a lack of coherent   monitoring, evaluation, and learning (MEL) framework. Only a mid-term evaluation was done   in 2011 instead of every five years, as envisaged.    4.2.3. Results   TDV2025 implementation has largely achieved average results in most of the targets (Table   27), such as the provision of basic education, primary health care, water access, extending   life expectancy to 68 years, macro-economic management (e.g., single digit inflation rate),   and maintaining peace and unit, appear to have achieved above average results. However,   some areas stand out as having failed to contribute to overall better results from the   implementation of Vision. For example, (a) inability to implement more growth-inclusive   strategies, leaving the agriculture sector lagging in growth rate and therefore failing to   reduce poverty levels in rural and urban areas; (b) persistent high rate of unemployment and   provision of decent formal and informal jobs among the youth. This is regarded because of   inappropriately designed education policies that don’t promote vocational skills education   and low levels of value addition of the produced materials from agriculture, mining, and   forestry sectors; and (c) Pending governance matters, especially in crafting a new   constitution and cultivated tolerance and co-existence of political parties. Figure 47 presents   the overall assessment of TDV2025.   Table 27: Overall Scores for TDV2025 Design, Implementation and Results   Description   Overall Score   Percent   Design   Implementation   Results   Overall score   3   60%   3   60%   3   60%   3   60%   Source: Evaluators’ independent opinions   94 | Page   Figure 47: Overall Assessment of TDV2025   Source: Evaluators’ independent opinions   4.3   TDV2025 Attributes performance assessment   4.3.1. Attribute #1: Improved livelihoods   According to the findings, the attribute of improved livelihoods attained an average   performance (Table 27 and Figure 47). It is noteworthy that most of the targets, including   reduced maternal mortality, infant mortality, increased enrolment in educational institutions,   increased access to health care, access to clean water, and food self-sufficiency, have been   met by more than 70 percent. However, they were pulled down by an inability to eliminate   abject poverty, which was scored very lowly by most stakeholders. There were also   reservations that although the targets for putting up infrastructure for the provision of basic   education (resulting in increased enrolment of pupils and students), the issues of quality and   imparting life skills among children were yet to be resolved. Delayed services and   unaffordable costs for accessing medical care, as well as unprofessional conduct of some   public health sector personnel, were issues that tarnished the successes achieved in the   provision of health services (resulting in reduced distance and increased attendance to   clinics by mothers and immunization of infants). There was also dissatisfaction that although   the distance to safe water points had been reduced due to the expanded water supply   network, the commodity was not available all days of the week due to rationing.    4.3.2. Attribute #2: Good Governance    Similarly, attribute#2 on good governance attained an average performance (Table 27 and   Figure 47). The evaluation findings show good progress in adopting policies and legal   frameworks as well as establishing watchdog and oversight institutions for promoting and   safeguarding the established good governance frameworks. Although there were still   challenges in building “corruption-free” institutions and instilling some mindset changes   among citizens in demanding bribery-free services, the majority of Tanzanians tend to   comply with the rule of law and cherish peaceful co-existence with other citizens irrespective   of tribe and religious differences. Public institutions are still to perfect their roles in ensuring   Tanzanians don’t suffer from corruption, rights infringement, and shrinking of civic space.    95 | Page   4.3.3. Attributes #3: Promotes the culture of a learning society   This attribute attained the lowest performance (below average) of all attributes (Table 28 and   Figure 47). There was a low push for this as far as the TDV2025 implementation is   concerned. According to the findings, the Tanzanian education system does not prepare   people to learn on their own, and it does not promote creative thinking and self-reliance.   Social media has been misused, resulting in moral decay, particularly among the young.   4.3.4. Attibute#4: Semi-industrialized, competitive, and inclusive middle  income country (MIC) economy   This attribute has also attained an average performance (Table 27 and Figure 47). Although   the country’s macro-economic variables, such that it did better than most Sub-Saharan   African countries in managing an inflation rate below five percent and propelling GDP growth   between 6 and 7 percent for most of the years after 2005, the economic growth was not   inclusive enough. This was due to the inability to instill and promote growth in agriculture   (crops, livestock, fisheries, and forestry), which supports more than two-thirds of the   country’s population. There is a lack of consistency with frequency shifts in focus. For   example, (a) during the first ten years of the Vision, there were relatively low levels of public   investments in economy and promotion of industrialization compared to the provision of   social services and improved governance; (b) diversification of energy sources mix, at one   time mobilizing public and private sector resources in developing natural gas for power   generation, but mid-way turning to hydro-power generation, sidelining concerns on   environmental sustainability due to yet to be rationalized competing use of water catchments   that are negatively affecting water flows to streams, rivers and wetlands; (c) delayed mining   of iron-ore that was envisaged as a source of local supply of iron for industries and the   expansion of railway network; and, (d) relatively less emphasis on the railway transportation   network, which provides cheaper transport costs for goods compared to roads. The country   lacks enough processing industries to tap the potential in value addition of the products,   which, once produced, lack the prerequisite quality and quantity to compete with foreign   products.   4.3.5. Attribute#5: Peace, stability, and national unity   TDV2025 vision has primarily achieved Attribute#5 on Peace, stability, and national unity   (Table 28 and Figure 47). Most respondents agree that the country has maintained peace,   security and national unity. However, this condition is usually threatened during general   elections when issues of a new constitution, having a free and fair election process, and   dealing with some pending matters on the union between Tanganyika and Zanzibar are hotly   debated by the public.    96 | Page   Table 28: Assessment of the Five Attributes of TDV2025   Attributes   Attribute#1- Improved Livelihoods   Score   Percent   3   Attribute#2- Good governance   3   60%   60%   Attribute#3- Promotes the culture of a learning society   Attribute#4- Semi-industrialized, competitive, and inclusive MIC economy   2   40%   3   Attribute#5- Peace, stability, and national unity   4   60%   80%   Overall Performance   Source: Evaluators’ independent opinions   Figure 48: TDV2025 attributes performance   3   60%   Source: Evaluators’ independent opinions   4.4   Evaluation criteria    4.4.1. Relevance    The evaluation findings largely show that TDV2025 goals, attributes, targets, and allied   interventions, such as strategies, policies, programs, projects, etc., were relevant. As such,   the vision and interventions implemented were related to the needs and priorities of   Tanzanians and have continued to do so throughout the vision (regardless of circumstances   change). Social services, infrastructures, and economic growth were important and relevant   features of the vision for individual, household, community, local, national, regional (EAC,   SADC, AU), and global (UN/SDGs). The attributes and goals pursued during the period 2000   to 2025 appear to be still relevant beyond 2025, which should be designed to include other   aspects that were identified in 2000 but were not specified in the three strategic goals and   the respective targets, as explained in Part Six of this report.   4.4.2. Coherence   According to the evaluation findings, several projects and programs that were implemented   to achieve TDV2025 were entirely compatible and had some synergy. For example, rural   electrification had some positive role in ensuring the quality provision of health services (e.g.,   97 | Page   refrigeration of vaccines and operation of scanning machines) as well as pumping of water   and the establishment of small industries. On the other hand, the benefits of establishing a   network of all-weather roads connecting all regional and district towns would be sub-optimal   if rural roads were impassable; hence, the establishment of the TARURA focuses on   opening rural roads to enable farm produce to reach urban consumers and industries.   However, the findings point to the lack of communication strategy that might have affected   some interventions to tap potential linkages, synergies, and cross-fertilization for   complementary and supplementary effects, thus promoting sustainability and a more   significant impact.   4.4.3. Effectiveness    The effectiveness in the implementation of TDV2025-related interventions during the first ten   years was dwarfed by the inability to balance financial resources between social services   (relatively well-funded MKUKUTA supported by Development Partners) and the real   economy that depends on well-functioning infrastructural services (e.g., transport network   and energy supply for industries), which did not receive the pre-requisite resources. This   anomaly was, however, corrected after switching to five-year development plans. Some   investments, such as the national broadband backbone optic fiber network, which connected   Dar-es-salaam with all regional and district towns, including towns bordering neighboring   countries, could not be as effective as planned in promoting a digital economy. This was   after TTCL failed to mobilize public and private resources to invest in last-mile connectivity to   homes, offices, shops, factories, schools, hospitals, etc. To this end, the implementation of   TDV2025 was, to some extent, not effective, with a bit of losing focus on the goals and   targets of the vision.    4.4.4. Efficiency   The evaluation findings show that the vision lacked a strong communication strategy and   resource mobilization strategy, and there was some unexpected switching of focus that   affected the efficient use of both public and private sector resources. For example, the silent   switch of focus from natural gas for power generation to hydropower resulted in the wastage   of investments made by the private sector in anticipation of opportunities in the natural gas   economy. Some preliminary investments in wind energy production in Singida (PPP model)   and Makambako (private sector) have also been left to waste. Energy, white elephants. To   rationalize public resources, it was advised to adopt the Malaysia model of planning that   enhances the efficient and effective use of resources. The Big Results Now (BRN) was   adopted but was abandoned halfway with a rationalized explanation. The resolve to   establish Special Economic Zones (SEZ) in all regions, an approach that enhances the   efficient allocation of infrastructural facilities by exploiting economies of scale, was not given   the weight and priority it deserved. The same applies to initiatives intended to improve the   efficiency in the operations of major ports. To this end, resources such as time, personnel,   and money seem not to be used efficiently.    98 | Page   4.4.5. Impact   TDV2025 intervention results mostly have positive impacts, especially in the education and   health sectors. Increased school enrollment, reduced child mortality rate, rural electrification,   roads, and railway infrastructures have resulted in positive impacts. However, there are   impacts with adverse consequences, such as the increased school enrollment that resulted   in increased college and university graduates but prompted increased unemployment since   the education sector produces a massive number of graduates than job opportunities   generated in the economy at large.   4.4.6. Sustainability   Primarily strategic interventions such as projects and programs that were implemented to   achieve TDV2025 are likely to continue beyond the period of the Vision. Among the   sustainability worries during the TDV2025 Mid-term review in 2011 was the bias in favor of   social services infrastructure without much investment in promoting real economic growth   from which the government could obtain some tax revenue to sustain the provision of the   established social services. This was corrected after the adoption of a five-year planning   framework. However, the sustainability of interventions and results would very much depend   on the level of political will, utility, and continued need for such benefits, participation, and   engagement of beneficiaries.    99 | Page   PART FIVE   5.0   5.1   LESSONS LEARNED FROM TDV2025 IMPLEMENTATION   An Overview   Lessons from the implementation of TDV2025 were drawn from four primary sources:   stakeholder views obtained during consultations as part of the review in 2023; progress   reports on the implementation of various sector-specific plans (e.g., energy sector, transport   sector, and water sector) and national programs (e.g., Five Year Development Plans);   special report TDV2025 Mid-Term Review conducted in 2011; and literature review of   experiences of comparator countries.   5.2   Resource Mobilization Experience During TDV2025: A snapshot   The government recognizes that the availability of adequate resources, timely disbursement,   right absorptive capacity, and proper use are critical for delivering the TDV 2025 objectives.   Traditionally, the government finances rely on two main traditional sources of revenue to   finance both the recurrent/operational and development/investment budgets, namely   domestic revenue (tax and non-tax) and foreign financing (grants and loans). Loans can be   from domestic or foreign sources, and they can also be concessional or non  concessional/commercial. This has been the composition of the government budget frame   for many years, which has not changed materially to date.    In 2009-2010, the government carried out, for the first time after ten years, a comprehensive   assessment of the implementation of the TDV 2025. One of the key findings of the study   about resource mobilization was that the government development budget was dependent   on a very narrow base, namely domestic revenue and foreign aid. In view of this, during the   formulation of the First National Five-Year Development Plan (FYDP I) 2011/12- 2015/16,   the government took due cognizance of the limitations of the traditional sources for financing   the development budget. Also, the government resolved to allocate, on average, at least 35   percent of the national budget to the development budget during the FYDP I period. So in   addition to the traditional sources of finance, the government introduced innovative project   financing which included inter alia, Infrastructure and Savings Bonds (Diaspora bonds,   domestic bonds, foreign market bonds), Pension and Social Security Funds, Strategic   Partners’ Grants and Donations, Government Guarantee (public institutions, private sector  PPP), Sovereign Borrowing, Regional Economic Arrangements and South-South   Cooperation, Taxation and Financial Transactions, National Climate Fund, Debt to Health   Initiative, Voluntary Based Initiatives, Sub-Sovereign Bonds and Super Profit Tax on   Minerals.   However, by the time the FYDP II was launched in June 2016, it was noted that inadequate   financing continued to be a major constraint in the implementation of development plans   (“underfunding and bad timing of disbursements”29). It was also noted that despite the   29    URT, Ministry of Finance and Planning, National Five-Year Development Plan, 2016/17-2020/21, June 2016.   100 | Page   101 | Page   innovative project financing initiatives introduced in FYDP I, there was no strategic action   plan to translate them into reality.30      While the FYDP II development financing strategy does not make explicit reference to the   several innovative project financings stated in the FYDP I, it gives a general policy stance of   encouraging the private sector to invest in commercial projects alone or in partnership with   the government (PPP). The overall assessment of the implementation of the FYDP II   showed that private sector investment during the first four years of the plan was TZS 32.6   trillion, which was 85 percent of the estimated TZS 38.4 trillion.31      Promotion of the private sector in development activities is sustained in the FYDP III, which   is expected to contribute about TZS 40.6 trillion (about 35%) of the estimated total cost of   about TZS 114.8 trillion. All modalities of financing, both traditional and innovative, will be   pursued. As eluded earlier, the structure of the government budget frame has remained   materially static/similar for many years, as displayed in Table 29. It is, therefore, not possible   to quantify the magnitude and trends in innovative project financing adopted in the FYDP I in   June 2012.      Table 29: Government Budget Frame, comparing 2015/16 and 2023/24   Main Sources   of Revenue   Sub-Items 2015/16 2023/24 Change over the   two periods (%)   TZS Millions TZS Millions Percentage   Government   Domestic   Revenue   Total 13,475,644 30,237,128 124.4   Tax Revenue (TRA) 12,362,959 26,725,409 116.2   Non-Tax Revenue 1,112,685 3,511,719 215.6   LGA own source 521,879 1,143,883 119.2   External   Grants and   Concessional   Loans   Total 2,322,518 5,466,215 135.4   General Budget Support  660,337 2,184,134 230.8   Project Loans and Grants  1,463,155 3,151,958 115.4   Basket Loans and Grants  199,026 130,123 -34.6   Domestic and   External Non  concessional   Loans    Total 6,175,452 7,540,840 22.1   External Non-concessional   Borrowing  0 2,100,464     Domestic Non-concessional   Borrowing  2,142,469 1,898,316 -11.4   Domestic Non-concessional   Borrowing (Rollover) 2,600,000 3,542,061 36.2   domestic loans 1.5% of GDP[1] 1,432,983 0 -100.0     TZS Million 22,495,492 44,388,067 97.3   Source: CAG reports, various years         30  URT, Ministry of Finance and Planning, National Five-Year Development Plan, 2016/17-2020/21, June 2016.   31  URT, Ministry of Finance and Planning, National Five-Year Development Plan, 2021/22-2025/26, June 2021.   102 | Page   In 2012, more than 10 innovative project financing mechanisms were identified. Still, as   explained above, disaggregated data on their application is difficult to track in formal   government budget records because they are mostly off-budget expenditures. A few   examples include the Kigamboni bridge (mega infrastructure) financed by an NSSF loan, the   University of Dodoma (education) financed by a consortium of social security funds, the local   government college (education) financed by LAPF, the Mkulazi sugar project financed by   NSSF, Kilimanjaro International Leather factory (NSSF), and procurement of medical   equipment (NHIF), etc. Also, many projects have been financed under Corporate Social   Responsibilities (CSRs) as well as community contributions/voluntary in-kind inputs. At the   same time, commercial banks (NMB, CRDB, StanChart) have participated effectively in   providing guarantees for loans financing mega government infrastructure projects, including   Julius Nyerere Hydro Power Project (JNHPP), Standard Gauge Railway (SGR), etc. The   commercial banks, in particular NMB and CRDB, have partnered with the government to   finance loans for university students and provide low-cost loans (single digit) for agricultural   investments.    It is high time the government put in place procedures for capturing all modalities of private   sector investments taking place to generate data and information on innovative financing   mechanisms.      However, despite the inability to expand the tax base and sources of revenue, the   performance of revenue collected against the budget was almost or above 90 percent for   most of the years, with the exception of FY 2016/16 (84.5%) and 2018/19 (79.5%) (Table   30). This could be attributed to tax administration reforms that included enhanced taxpayers’   awareness programs.       Table 29: Government Revenue Performance (TZS. billion) from 2007/08 to 2021/22   Financial   Year   202   1/   22   202   0/   21   201   9   /20   201   8/   19   201   7/   18   201   6   /17   201   5/   16   201   4/   15   201   3/   14   201   2/   13   201   1/   12   201   0/   11   200   9/   10   200   8/   09   200   7/   08   Approve   d Budget 38.0 34.9 33.   1 32.5 31.7 29.   9 22.5 19.5 17.9 15.2 13.5 6.2 5.1 4.8 3.5   Actual   Collectio   ns   38.3 31.3 31.   5 25.8 27.7 25.   3 21.1 18.4 16.3 15.1 12.2 5.7 4.7 4.3 3.6   % actual/   budget   100.   8 89.8 95.   2 79.5 87.3 84.   5 93.8 94.4 91.1 98.8 89.8 92.8 91.5 89.8 1.04   Source: CAG reports, various years   Another aspect to assess regarding resource mobilization is the efficiency and effectiveness   of resource mobilization and application. This data is available in the Annual Reports of the   Controller and Auditor General (CAG), which are prepared every year. Table 29 shows the   aggregate data on the development budget over time and the corresponding disbursement   and absorption rates.32          32  URT, The National Audit Office, Annual General Report of the Controller and Auditor General for the Financial Year   2021/22, Central Government, March 2023.   103 | Page   Table 30: Snapshot of Development Budget (TZS Billion) Turn-out and Absorption rate by MDAs   Financial year 2021/2   2   2020/2   1   2019/2   0   2018/1   9   2017/1   8   2016/1   7   2015/1   6   2014/1   5   2013/1   4   2012/1   3   2011/1   2   Development   Budget   11.7 10.9 10.6 10.5 10.1 10.2 5.0 4.4 5.0 4.2 4.3   Disbursements 11.6 9.3 7.0 7.1 7.2 6.9 3.8 2.9 3.1 3.2 3.4   Actual   Expenditure   11.4 9.0 6.9 7.1 7.1 6.0 3.7 2.9 3.1 3.2 3.4   %   Disbursed/Bud   get   99.5 84.7 66.2 68.3 71.2 67.8 75.8 67.3 62.5 78.8 78.5   %Actual   expenditure/   Disbursed   98.3 97.5 97.7 99.8 98.7 87.1 98.9 98.7 99.9 98.6 99.7   Source: CAG reports, various years      Based on the above data (Table 30), despite experiences noted in years in which the   exchequer disbursed between 66 and 90 percent of the approved budget, it can be   assumed, ceteris paribus, that the absorption rate of the released resources was reasonably   good, reaching above 95 percent (Table 30).       Inclusive development calls for a friendly and participatory taxation system, managing   disparities and inequalities, and prioritizing local content, employment, capacity building,   technology transfer, and community linkages.         5.3 Lessons from Comparator Countries      a) Infrastructure development: Higher levels of investment in enablers for real economic   growth, notably electrical energy for industries, was the main factor that separated a set   comparator country from Tanzania. In power supply, the comparator countries had   already attained electricity supply above 200 kWh per capita before graduating to MIC   status. Vietnam, for example, had reached a per capita supply of 245 kWh ten years   before it graduated to MIC status in 1990. This contrasted with Tanzania’s 95 kWh per   capita in 2010, some 15 years before 2025. The review report, therefore, recommended   the government to deliberate efforts to accelerate the generation and supply of electricity   power. The government took up this recommendation by encouraging partnerships with   the private sector in the drilling and utilization of natural gas for electricity generation.      b) Relative contribution of agricultural and industrial sectors to GDP in comparator   LMIC some 16 years before attaining MIC status had reached around 24 percent. In   contrast, during the same remaining years to 2025, its contribution was 28.4 percent.   This implied that the industrialization process in comparator countries was characterized   by a reduction in the share of agriculture by 4.4 percentage points over 16 years. The   manufacturing sector of the LMICs contributed 17.8 percent to GDP in the year of   graduation, compared to 9.4 percent for Tanzania in 2009. It was computed that for   Tanzania to resemble the LMIC economy by 2025, the share of the manufacturing sector   will have to increase by at least 0.56 percentage points annually between 2010 and 2025   to change the sector’s contribution to GDP from 9.4 to 17.8 percent, respectively. It was   feared that it would be difficult to realize given the state of power supply necessary for   manufacturing to thrive.   c) Role of SMEs in industrial development and contribution to GDP: Comparator   countries had done better than Tanzania in promoting small and medium-sized   enterprises (SMEs), which are regarded as intermediating institutions in economic   growth. Evidence was provided that whereas SMEs in Tanzania contributed 22.6 percent   of Tanzania’s GDP and more than 80 percent of formal employment, those in Indonesia   contributed 58.3 percent to GDP and 80-95 percent to employment generation. SMEs in   China accounted for 90 percent of the country’s enterprises. Tanzania has almost the   same level of employment contribution by SMEs but with less contribution to GDP,   implying need to raise efficiency and productivity in the informal sector and small  scale operations.    d) Human development: The comparator LMICs had invested relatively heavily in human   capital compared to Tanzania. Human capital is regarded as an important and necessary   ingredient for economic development. It seems that Tanzania spent too many years   investing in lower levels of human capital development, mostly focusing on primary   education that did not promote competence or skills.    e) Institutional arrangement and accountability: There was strictness in the way   institutions were managed, and staff were rewarded when they did well and sanctioned   when they failed to perform. This was an area Tanzania has tried to emulate when it   implemented public sector reform programmes and introduced OPRAS in the civil   service whereby staff are evaluated based on key performance indicators (KPIs).   f) Political will and promoters: One of the hallmarks of LMICs was the prevalence of   strong political will and support for the role of champions for flagship projects. Shifting of   emphasis on flagship projects between successive governments may have contributed   to delayed completion of those projects.    It is further noted in some literature on what African countries can learn from the experiences   of Singapore, a unique city state and an island economy. The lessons should take into   account special circumstances prevailing in each country. Table 31 shows some comparison   and contrast in the approaches adopted by Singapore and Tanzania:   Table 31 Comparison of Development Approaches of Singapore with that by Tanzania   Singapore’s   Approach   Development   to   How Tanzania Did   Results   in   Tanzania   a) Good Governance and Low   Corruption: Singapore is known for   its clean and efficient government   due to zero tolerance to corruption   that   builds trust and attracting   investments. This creates a stable   environment that fosters economic   growth.    TDV2025 Goal 2 focused   on   promoting   good   governance, rule of law   and public service ethics.   Established   As shown in chapter 3   of   this   Prevention   report.   and   combating corruption   various   watchdogs and oversight   institutions to promote the   realization of the goal    is   still   progress”   country   “work   as   has   in   the   not   reached the desirable   104 | Page   105 | Page   Singapore’s Approach to   Development   How Tanzania Did Results in   Tanzania   levels.   b) Investment in Education:   Singapore places a high value on   education and has invested heavily   in its educational system. This has   produced a skilled and adaptable   workforce, which is crucial in the   modern global economy.    Tanzania spent the first   20 years after   independence focusing on   basic literacy levels,   before embarking on   tertiary type of education.   More universities and   technical colleges   established and even   introduced higher   education loans board to   ensure inclusivity in   accessing education.   Lack of qualified and   competent skilled   manpower has been   a persistent complaint   among industrial   sector stakeholders.   Reason given: the   country has delayed   implementing a   competence based   education system   c) Openness to Global Trade and   Investment: Singapore is one of the   world's most open economies. It   actively encourages trade, foreign   investment, and the flow of capital.   Developing countries can benefit   from embracing globalization, while   ensuring they protect vulnerable   domestic industries.   Signatory to WTO   protocols and   associated instruments   for protecting   international   investments. TIC and   EPZA were established to   encourage FDIs.   Competition Commission   in place.   Opening the   economy wasn’t   coupled with   precautionary   measures to   safeguard infant   industries   d) Infrastructure Development:   Singapore invested significantly in   infrastructure development, including   efficient transportation networks, a   world-class airport, and a modern   port. This infrastructure has been   key to attracting foreign investment   and supporting economic growth.   Emphasis on   infrastructure to support   real economy sectors   started after the   adoption of long-term   planning perspective   2011-2025 implemented   through five-year   development plans. The   first 10 years of TDV2025   was preoccupied with the   provision of social   services through   MKUKUTA.   Experiencing   inadequate supply   of adequate and   reliable electricity of   lack of qualified and   competent needed   for industrial   development.   e) Diversification of the Economy:   Singapore has a highly diversified   economy, with strong sectors in   finance, manufacturing, logistics, and   technology. Developing countries   can learn to avoid overreliance on a   single industry or sector to reduce   vulnerability to economic shocks.   Tanzania’s economy is   highly diversified with   possibility of generating   and exported value   added products from   agriculture (crops,   livestock, forestry, and   fisheries), wildlife, and   minerals as well as taking   advantage of its   geographical position to   serve land-locked   Tanzania has not   done enough in (i)   pre-export products   value addition, and (ii)   optimizing benefits   from her natural   resources for tourism   (from wildlife and   marine) and transport   (use of her ports to   take advantage of its   geographical   106 | Page   Singapore’s Approach to   Development   How Tanzania Did Results in   Tanzania   countries and link them   with the rest of the world   through its lake ports   (Tanganyika, Victoria and   Nyasa) and its Indian   ocean ports of Tanga,   Zanzibar, Dar-es-salaam   and Mtwara).   position).   f) Innovation and Technology   Adoption: Singapore has a keen   focus on innovation and the adoption   of advanced technologies. This has   helped it stay competitive and   maintain high productivity levels.   Developing countries can invest in   research and development and   foster an environment that supports   innovation.   Tanzania adopted   policies that promote   innovations, science,   and technology,   including the   establishment of the   Commission for Science   and Technology   (COSTECH).    The proportion of   resources dedicated   to R&D is far below   the recommended 1   percent of the GDP.   Consequently, there   have not been   enough innovations   that could help   Tanzania to stay   ahead of the pack in   terms of application of   technology to raise   productivity.   g) Prudent Fiscal Management:   Singapore has a high savings rate,   and the government has managed   those savings wisely. Singapore   emphasizes fiscal discipline and   prudent management of public   finances. This includes maintaining   low debt levels, balancing budgets,   and using surpluses to invest in the   country's future.   Tanzania has tried to   adopt similar policies to   achieve higher levels of   savings starting at family   level; implemented public   sector financial   management programmes   including the use of   medium term expenditure   framework (MTEF) and   adopting debt   management framework   The country’s   savings ratio relative   to GDP is still low,   with the national debt   ratio rising to higher   levels although still   below 50 percent of   national GDP.    h) Social Cohesion and Inclusivity:   Singapore has a strong focus on   social cohesion and inclusivity. It has   implemented policies to reduce   income inequality and provide a   safety net for its citizens. Developing   countries can benefit from policies   that promote social harmony and   inclusivity.   Cultivation of national   unity was the lead   slogan immediate after   independence (“uhuru   na umoja”), necessary   to unite more than 120   tribes under one   language of Kiswahili.   Several programmes have   been implemented to   ensure inclusive growth   that bring on-board low  income segments of the   society (e.g. TASAF) and   also formalizing their   assets (e.g. under   Although progress   has been, there still   work to be done to   ensure that “no body   is left behind” as   unemployment,   specifically among the   youth.   107 | Page   Singapore’s Approach to   Development   How Tanzania Did Results in   Tanzania   MKURABITA)   i) Long-Term vision and Planning:   Singapore's success is often   attributed to its long-term planning   and vision. The government has   consistently implemented well  considered policies over decades,   focusing on economic stability,   infrastructure development, and   human capital.   TDV2025 and its medium   term planning   frameworks (Five Year   Development Plans)  and   the corresponding plans   for different sectors such   as transport and energy    Still under   implementation but   will fall short of   taking Tanzania to   the planned level of   USD 3,000 per capita   middle income   country status   j) Flexibility and Adaptability:   Singapore has demonstrated the   ability to adapt and evolve its   economic strategies in response to   changing global circumstances.   Developing countries should be open   to adjusting their policies as needed   to navigate complex economic   challenges.   Tanzania’s governance   system, whereby the   ruling party sets   development agenda   every after 5 years allows   for flexibility and   adaptations to cope with   changing situation   Tanzania appears to   have suffered from   lack of consistency   and predictable   policies on priority   flagship projects and   implementation   approaches     k) Pro-Business Environment:   Singapore's business-friendly   policies, efficient bureaucracy, and   low levels of corruption make it an   attractive destination for foreign   investors. Developing countries can   learn from Singapore's efforts to   create an environment conducive to   business growth.   Tanzania has   undertaken different   measures meant to   establishing business   enabling environment   for the last 25 years.   Although the   country has   gradually climbed   the ladder in   ensuring a business   enabling   environment, more   is still needed.     l) Environmental Sustainability: In   recent years, Singapore has also   prioritized environmental   sustainability and green initiatives.   This demonstrates the importance of   considering long-term environmental   impacts in economic planning.   Tanzania has ratified   international protocols   for adopting   environmentally friendly   developmental   approaches. It is also   eligible to benefit from   global funds for   promoting green growth   strategy   The country has not   fully accessed   global funds that   support elimination   of green gases   emissions and   pursuing green   growth trajectory   Source: Consultant’s literature search      Tanzania appears to have attempted to emulate Singapore’s policies and approach to   development but has obtained results very far away to reaching the latter’s level of   development. This offers some lessons that more is needed for a country to develop beyond   emulating policies and programmes of another country. This is because countries differ in   terms cultural, historical, or geographical contexts.          5.4   Lessons from TDV2025 End Programme Review in 2023   The lessons learned are divided into two categories: those that are cross-cutting and apply   to the whole development vision implementation framework and those that are sector  specific, as explained below.   5.4.1. General lessons   a) The concept of TDV 2025, the main attributes and pillars that are stipulated, the targets   and goals, the identified driving forces and the implementation strategy are still valid and   relevant. What fell short is the operationalization of the goals and some targets and gaps   in elaborating on the various goals and targets and interpreting the driving forces in   greater detail by sector, region, district and lower levels. It is also necessary to elaborate   in more detailed plans and implementation strategies at all levels, considering new   internal and external dynamics affecting implementation.   b) A significant achievement of Vision 2025 is that it gave a sense of direction for the   development of the country at a time when short-term recovery programmes, which   started in the 1980s, had become the order of the day. It provided a sense of direction   and a long-term perspective of where the nation was going.   c) Implementation of TDV has left gaps on several fronts: delivering high and shared   growth, transforming, and modernizing agriculture, developing supporting industries and   services activities, developing benchmarks for competitiveness, and explicitly striving to   make progress in this area. In addition, gaps remain in putting technological   development at the center of all activities, articulation of economic empowerment   consistently in all sectors, articulating a public-private partnership policy and   operationalizing it, emulating performance and improving the quality of education and   interpreting and organizing for building a learning society and reforming the education   and training system to enable it to instill desirable attributes in society including   confidence, creativity and innovativeness.   d) TDV 2025 emphasizes growth that is also shared (inclusive). Implementation was   initiated through two main programmes, Economic Empowerment and MKURABITA33   and through formulating an agricultural development strategy in a sector where poverty   is widespread. MKURABITA has addressed the options for harnessing the potential of   many citizens who are engaged in informal economic activities. However, the initiatives   taken have been narrow and not mainstreamed into the government policy framework as   part of the private sector development strategy and the economic empowerment policy.   Instead, it operated in a stand-alone fashion.    b) Economic empowerment has been identified as an important measure to be taken to   promote the participation of the indigenous population in the economy. However, the   experience of economic empowerment has shown that it has made modest progress in   mainstreaming it in all sectors, and its effectiveness was not broadened and deepened in   terms of coverage and multiplicity of instruments used mainly because of limitations in   resource allocation to the National Economic Empowerment Council (NEEC).   33    Mpango wa Kurasimisha Rasilimali na Biashara za Wanyonge Tanzania.   108 | Page   Agricultural transformation and raising the level of productivity and incomes did not   happen. Promising initiatives to transform agriculture have started recently from 2023.   a) Need for predictability of policies, strategies and institutional frameworks for planning   and implementing development initiatives. For example, the Planning Commission that   was responsible for preparing TDV2025 was dissolved in 2016, only to be revived in   2023. There have also been frequent changes in the ministerial portfolio, e.g., in the last   six years, the Investment Portfolio has been shifted to different ministries. Additionally,   there are frequent changes in high-level officials and chief executives. The irrigation   portfolio has also been shifted from the Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) to the Ministry of   Water (MoW), back to MOA and later settled as a Commission for Irrigation. These   changes were often associated with changes in focus and prioritization. This is an   indication that prioritization and focus were not adequately institutionalized in such a way   that changes in personalities and location of departments would have made little   difference.   b) Achieving inclusive economic growth requires special attention to transforming those   sectors that carry most people, such as the agricultural sector. This lesson is based on   the analysis that although the economy was growing above six percent, the contributing   sectors to GDP growth had fewer people compared to the agricultural sector, whose   growth rate was, on average, below four percent, just slightly above the annual   population growth rate. The importance of having inclusive growth was underscored by   participants in FGDs who listed a range of targets that failed to impress. Among them,   which scored highest in under-performance, were reducing abject poverty (15.3%),   eliminating corruption (14.2%), and upholding moral and cultural uprightness (12.5%)   (Figure 48).   109 | Page   Figure 49: Scores (%) of worst-performing sectors as judged by stakeholders.   Source: Field data 2023   a) Life Expectancy: Need for preparedness in handling and ensuring the provision of   prerequisite social services to senior citizens. The study participants also underscored   the importance of community sensitization regarding lifestyle changes, including eating   habits, physical activity, and the current wave of increased accidents involving 'boda  boda'. These have been some of the primary sources of deaths in the country. In building   a competitive semi-industrialized economy, the sectors that had proportionately higher   contributions to the recorded GDP growth for the last 22 years failed to benefit most   Tanzanians. Therefore, in future, there should be special attention to transforming those   sectors, the easiest being the agriculture sector (crops, livestock, fisheries, and forestry),   which can have higher multiplier effects through backward and forward linkages.   b) Application and use of ICT in the digitization of public service delivery can enhance   transparency and accountability among ministries, departments, and agencies.   c) Need for focus and dedication to pursue agreed national priorities. For example, in the   energy sector, the strategy was to invest in the development of natural gas for power   generation. Still, it was partially implemented, resulting in underutilization of the gas   pipeline and power shortages.    d) Population growth and structure that is commensurate with economic growth so that   there is an adequate translation of the economic growth to household incomes and   improved livelihoods. Two specific demographic dynamics will need to be considered:   first is the issue of population growth and urbanization and their implications for both   human development and economic transformation. Second, providing the prerequisite   socio-economic opportunities for the expanding population and ensuring it doesn’t   jeopardize environmental sustainability. Further, proper urban planning is critical to   facilitate development through site planning and planning of economic activities of urban   centers to be effective economic growth drivers.   e) Importance of allocating the prerequisite financial and human resources commensurate   with the approved development plans: There is a need for a robust plan for financial   resource mobilization and creating an enabling business environment for the foreign and   domestic private sectors to invest in industries and businesses. This was noted as a   110 | Page   weak area leading to the failed implementation of the “Tanzania Mini-Tiger Plan 2020”   (TMTP 2020) as a vehicle to fast-track the realization of TDV 2025 goals of creating a   semi-industrialized and competitive economy.    Among the targets that were lagging included the inability to attain the target of average   GDP growth of 8-10 percent per annum; realizing exports worth USD 20 billion by 2020,   from USD 1 billion in 2000; creating between 2 and 3 million new formal employment   jobs by 2020; and develop at least 30 Special Economic Zones (SEZ) by 2020. This was   based on the realization that there had been a low budget turn-out for some of the key   sector ministries, such as those responsible for agriculture (crops, livestock, and   fisheries), such that plans for expanding the area under irrigation were grossly lagging.   Low funds disbursement to implement projects made it difficult for public officials to be   objectively evaluated on the committed key performance indicators (KPIs).   This experience underscored the need to avoid over-ambitious investments not   supported by adequate financial and human resources, as well as balancing between   development expenditure and recurrent expenditure. For example, the building of health   facilities and classrooms without adequate health personnel and teachers.   f)   Need to have an enabling environment that empowers citizens to promote local content   that effectively enhances the participation of citizens in economic activities as per the   Constitution Article 8(1) (d) to enable the private sector to thrive. There is a need to   hasten the pace of implementing local content in all sectors, including building the   capacity of local contractors so that they can actively participate in mega infrastructure   projects and ultimately contribute and maximize the internalization of investments   through domestic backwards and forward linkages.   g) Need to sequence the implementation of the prioritized project. For example, the   development of basic industries for iron and steel (from Liganga and Mchuchuma) was   planned before commencing the building of the SGR. In practice, the construction of   SGR has preceded the implementation of the iron and steel project, resulting in huge   imports of steel and the use of foreign exchange.    h) In governance: Need for a pluralistic approach to enhance success in building a morally   and culturally upright society, requiring joint efforts by government, private sector, and   civil society organizations. Faith-based institutions should actively participate in civic   education programs that promote ethics at the family level. There is also a need for a   strong and efficient decentralized system that can enforce transparency and   accountability at the local level in line with subsidiarity principles. Also, there is a need to   respect the independence of strong oversight institutions to enforce public sector   accountability to the taxpayer. There should also be an active engagement of the public,   civil society organizations and private sector businesses in campaigns to enhance   governance and the rule of law instead of leaving the matter to oversight and watchdog   institutions alone.    i)   Need to have a dedicated secretariat for coordination of TDV2025, which would have,   among other things, the task of preparation and implementation of a Communication and   111 | Page   Dissemination Strategy. This was based on the realization that a small proportion of   Tanzanians, including political leaders, were aware of the existence of TDV2025.   j)   Need for sustained champions on agreed national projects, including the championing of   National Development Vision.   k) While the TDV has proposed that its implementation was to be made through five-year   plans, the first 10 years were preoccupied with implementing PRSP to enable the   country to access resources for debt relief; after 10 years, it was realized that the   practice of being preoccupied with PRSP and MKUKUTA as supported by donors was   covering narrower ground than TDV 2025 had called for. There is a need to strike a   balanced approach considering both improved social services (e.g., health, water,   education, food security and shelter) and enhancement of infrastructural services (e.g.,   transport, energy, and communication) to strengthen the real economy.    Despite the presumed good intention of Development Partners (DPs) focusing more on   Goal 1 and Goal 2 under MKUKUTA34, it was feared that if the real economy did not   perform as expected, there would be no adequate tax revenue to maintain the   investments made for improved social services. This lesson made a case for returning to   five-year plans as an instrument to implement TDV. This lesson underscores the risk of   diversion by donor preferences that came in the form of PRSP and MKUKUTA instead of   following five-year plans as instruments of implementing TDV.   l)   Adherence to the approved M&E framework, including regular evaluation of the Vision   every five years to allow for earlier corrective measures in weak areas of implementation.   The evaluation planned for 2005 was not done. It is now also known that evaluations   scheduled for 2015 and 2020 were also not done.   5.4.2. Sector-specific lessons   There are some sector-specific lessons, although not exhaustive, which are summarized   below:   a) In education: there is a need to promote competence and skill-based education systems   that respond to the needs of industries/sectors, create jobs for locals and promote   complementarity between local human resources and foreigners. It is also important to   have an improved learning environment, including an adequate ratio of students to   teachers/tutors.   b) In gender and women empowerment: Change of societal mindset, starting at the family   level, is an important factor in the success of empowering women to take more active   roles in social and economic spheres nationally and internationally.   c) Health services (i) ensure the right mix of quality infrastructure, retooling, and well  trained and motivated human resources; (ii) place a high priority on primary/public health   34    Mpango wa Kukuza Uchumi na Kupunguza Umaskini Tanzania (National Strategy for Growth and Poverty Reduction   (NSGPR)    112 | Page   to   attain a more appropriate balance between curative and preventive health   interventions; and (iii) implement more efficient, effective and affordable health insurance   scheme for all.   d) Water supply: Success in the protection and maintenance of water infrastructure,   including water catchments, water storage and distribution systems requires effective   partnerships between citizens and their government at different levels.    5.4.3. Application of the Lessons: The Way Forward   Most of the lessons outlined above are used to propose interventions that should be   considered by the team preparing the TDV2050 document. These are listed in Part Six of   this report. However, some of them may be used by the Government during the remaining   two years of TDV2025 implementation.   113 | Page   PART SIX   6.0   6.1   ISSUES ARISING FROM THE TDV 2025 EVALUATION FOR   CONSIDERATION IN THE TDV 2050   Key Issues for TDV2050 arising from TDV2025 evaluation   6.1.1. An Overview   The country needs to protect and sustain the progress gained in the last 22 years in all TDV   goals and attributes. It will also be important to capture issues that were identified in the   TDV2025 evaluation but were not addressed and are still relevant. Overall, the following will   need to be taken care of for the success of TDV 2050:   a) Special focus on the country’s national goals that promote broad-based inclusive   economic growth and poverty reduction and ensure that there is adequate and high  quality human capital.   b) Align with key development goals and targets that are in the UN SDG2030 and other   global initiatives with TDV2050. Among them are dealing with inclusive and shared   growth with minimum abject poverty (slogan: “no one should be left behind”, part of SDG   Goals 1 and 2), climate change adaption and ensuring environmental sustainability (part   of SDG Goal no.13 on environmental sustainability), life on land (SDG No.15) and life   below water (SDG No.14).   c) Align with goals and targets under regional (EAC and SADC) and the African Union’s   Agenda 2063. Of specific interest is the readiness of Tanzania to participate and benefit   from the Pan-African Free Trade Area (AfTA) and customs union implementation.   Specifically, some of the key cross-cutting issues to be considered from the above  mentioned overall goals include:   a) Intensify and strengthen initiatives for the digitization of the economy through ICT to   enhance efficiency in service delivery and improve transparency and accountability for   both public and private sectors.   b) Gradual and strategic adaptations towards high tech 4th industrial revolution for global   competitiveness while promoting employment creation.    c) Make legislation that will help to stabilize the predictability of policies, strategies, and   institutional frameworks for planning and implementing development initiatives so that   individual leaders do not change them without due process.   d) Ensure that all approved flagship projects are well planned, appropriately sequenced,   and timely provided with adequate financial (for both capital and operational expenses)   and the requisite human resources.    114 | Page   e) Promote capacity building of local contractors, including the requisite national and   international certification, so that they can actively participate in medium-scale and mega   infrastructure projects.   f)   Provide an enabling environment that empowers citizens to effectively participate in   economic activities to enable the private sector to thrive as per the (Blueprint for   Regulatory Reforms to Improve the Business Environment (the BLUEPRINT)) document.   g) Strict enforcement of Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning (MEL) in all interventions.   h) There should be a well-funded Communication Strategy for TDV 2050 to ensure that all   segments of the population are knowledgeable about and adequately sensitized.    i)   Identify champions on agreed national projects, including the championing of National   Development Vision 2050.   6.1.2. Goals Proposed for TDV 2050   a) Those carried forward from 2025, namely, (i) improved livelihoods, (ii) governance and   rule of law, and (iii) competitive economy and inclusive growth.   b) New ones, namely (i) climate change and environmental sustainability, (ii) digital   transformation, and (iii) sports, arts, and creative industry.   Those mentioned above are elaborated below.    6.1.3. Improved Livelihoods   a) Food Security and Agriculture: Ensuring a food-secure society with reduced malnutrition   is a critical area that will need some special attention given (i) the expanding market for   food products in the SADC and EAC countries and beyond, in addition to feeding   Tanzanians. This will require increased investment and support of the financial sector to   investors in irrigated farming, screen houses, pack houses, cold chain and commercially   operated livestock, fisheries, and apiary farming. That should be done with the aim to   raise the food self-sufficiency ratio to 140-150 percent from the current level of less than   120 percent; (ii) the importance of availability and access to nutritious food in reducing   malnutrition-related morbidity and death rates, and therefore contributing to increased life   expectancy; (ii)reduce malnutrition among adults as well by emphasizing on proper   food storage, preparation of balance diet and eating patterns; (iii) Investment is   needed to support research and development of biofortified seeds and tubers and safer   technologies for micro nutrition fortification during processing (iii) accelerate   modernization and commercialization of the agricultural sector that embraces smart   agriculture that is resilient to climate changes; and, need for (iv) investment in smart   irrigation systems.   115 | Page   b) Smart gender empowerment that includes all categories of gender, having balanced   support for boys and girls. Among the approaches to be promoted is the preparation of   the girl child from an early age to be self-confident and undertake some systematic   campaign nationwide to counter all cultural values that undermine the confidence of girls   to take roles that are traditionally regarded as reserved for boys or men only.   c) Education sector: there is a need to have a skills-based education system that responds   to the needs of industries/sectors to create jobs for locals and minimize the need to   employ foreigners. It is also important to have an improved learning environment,   including an adequate ratio of students to teachers/tutors. Among the outstanding   recommendations with respect to the education sector include: (i) raising the years for   compulsory basic education from Primary 7 to ordinary secondary school form 4; (ii)   Incorporating life and vocational educational skills, including Information Technology (IT)   from early stages of learning, Including ethics and morals as part of civic education; and   (iii)   compulsory national service training for all youth after completion of   schooling/college education.   d) Health services: (i) ensure the right mix of quality infrastructure, retooling, and well  trained and motivated human resources that are commensurate with population growth;   and (ii) ensure that the population growth rate corresponds to the economic growth rate.   e) Water supply: (i) protection of water sources in recognition of the challenges posed by   climate changes and increasing human population undertaking environmentally   unsustainable economic activities. Part of the uses of established “Water Funds'' should   be to support communities with alternative economic activities that don’t endanger water   catchments; (ii) implement strict maintenance of water supply infrastructure by ensuring   that all water supply programmes have adequate budget or mechanisms to raise funds   for operations and maintenance; and (iii) enhance adoption of water harvesting   techniques, ranging from medium to large scale and micro water harvesting projects.   f)   Life Expectancy: investment in social protection packages to cater for senior citizens. It   should also be remembered that increased years of living are closely linked to continued   improvements in access to adequate nutritious food, quality education, especially for   women as family caretakers, and access to quality health care for the population,   women, and children as well as access to clean, safe water. It will, therefore, be   important for the government to partner with non-state actors (private sector investors) to   improve on those metrics that enhance longevity.    g) Abject poverty: investment in sectors with a high propensity for employment creation,   specifically the agricultural sector.   6.1.4 Governance and Rule of Law   a) Given signs of continued deterioration of morals and adulteration of Tanzanian cultural   values, there will be a need to ensure that subjects on ethics and social morals are   adopted as part of mandatory learning among children from an early age.   116 | Page   b) Continue to support the establishment and building of a strong and efficient   decentralized system that can enforce transparency and accountability at the local level   in line with subsidiarity principles.   c) Strengthening a system-driven governance style in all service-delivering areas, starting   from Central to Local governments (e-government/e-office) with well-set online KPIs for   all public servants serving our communities.   d) Public service reform should be designed to institutionalize performance management   and incentives, ultimately leading to improved service delivery measured by results. This   improvement should enhance performance and accountability both upward to superiors   and downward to citizens. The primary focus should be on improving service delivery   processes and transformative leadership. The strategy for improving public service   delivery should revolve around creating a conducive environment for transformative   leadership in public service management. Transformative leadership should inspire and   motivate others to bring about changes in processes and attitudes, introducing new   methods in the public service. This is particularly important given the ongoing social and   economic transformation in the country, which demands improved service delivery at all   levels, ensuring sustainability and ownership. The strategy should provide a clear link   between inputs, outputs, and outcomes   e) Continue to seal loopholes that can erode the principles of separation of power between   the three pillars of the state: the executive, the judiciary and parliament. Within each,   there will still be a need to strengthen the independence of strong oversight institutions to   enforce public sector accountability.   f)   Complete the process of a new constitution as was aspired in TDV2025. Putting in place   a new ‘popular’ Constitution seems to be the overarching instrument for the realization of   the rule of law in the country. The government should decide on a constitution-making   process as demanded by many stakeholders.   g) Support the functioning of a formally constituted National Political Parties Forum.   h) Develop and adopt a national ethics policy.   i)   j)   Intensify prevention and combating corruption, particularly in the political parties’   ecosystem.    Although there is a legal and institutional framework with laws, obligations, and rights in   place, several socio-economic and legal hurdles persist, leading to inaccessibility to the   justice system. The ongoing efforts to remove the barriers must be intensified. There is a   need for the government and other stakeholders to empower the community to be aware   of the laws and rights, which shall, in turn, reduce the barriers.   k) Capacity Building of Watchdog and Oversight Institutions (WOIs) by building structures,   systems, processes, and institutional arrangements should be unrelenting.   l)   Public service delivery improved through several measures, including:   117 | Page   - Widespread use of technology, especially ICT. Strengthening a system-driven   governance style in all Services delivering areas, starting from central to local   governments (e-government/e-office) with well-set online KPIs for all public servants   serving our communities. - Strengthen the e-feedback system for assessment of public service delivery and   accountability.   m) In the endeavor to build a learning society, it will be important to establish or   revive/strengthen grassroots-level community learning centers cum libraries to promote   reading culture as part of continuous learning. It is also recommended to establish   adequately resourced vocational training centers, such as focal development centers   (FDCs), in every ward in the country. It is recommended to establish community libraries   at least in every ward so that the population has a place to read books in the vicinity.   In order to encourage learning at firm/institutional level, there will be need to create a   standard against which advancements in competitiveness can be gauged while identifying   and addressing the factors that impede competitiveness. After setting up these   competitiveness benchmarks, there should be a deliberate endeavour to make progress in   this domain, with a particular focus on placing technological development at the core of all   activities.   6.1.5. Competitive economy and inclusive growth   a) Maintain and sustain macro-economic stability through measures that include: - Controlling inflation at single-digit levels, preferably below five per cent, as per   regional (SADC and EAC) guidelines. - Maintain a market-determined realistic exchange rate, with the Central Bank’s (BoT)   intervention exclusively limited to smoothing wide fluctuations and/or liquidity   management purposes. - Increase domestic revenue collections through expanding the tax base and   improvements in tax administration. - The growth of broad money (M3) should be contained within a band that is consistent   with GDP growth and inflation targets. - The Central Bank continues managing liquidity in the economy, utilizing instruments   at its disposal. At the same time, the Government, on its part, strengthens the   implementation of prudent fiscal policies aimed at maintaining macroeconomic   stability and promotion of growth. - Develop and implement policies to increase savings and investment rates for   accelerated development, macro stability, efficient financial systems/institutions and   markets, public sector savings, including effective management and strategic use of   resource rents, and private sector profitability. - Set up fiscal research institutions to generate new ideas and evaluate existing fiscal   policies. - Broadening the tax base and stricter budget management discipline will reduce the   need for Government borrowing, hence reducing the costly public debt.   118 | Page   b) Direct more resources to areas that have a more significant and quick impact on   economic growth, such as agriculture, infrastructure, manufacturing, and energy.   Specifically, continue to improve the agriculture sector productivity, focusing on irrigation   schemes and modernizing livestock production systems and fishing. This will involve and   promote policies that contribute to value addition in agriculture through investment in   agro-processing and infrastructure (irrigation, access roads, etc.).   c) Strengthen regional and international trade by increasing the production of goods and   services for export in accordance with international standards. This should include the   promotion of the development of SMEs in the rural35 and urban areas for enhanced   production, increased employment opportunities and building capacities for SMEs by   linking them to the regional/global value chains.   d) Tanzania should optimize taking full advantage of its strategic geographic location as a   regional competitive trade gateway in serving most of the hinterland and the surrounding   land-locked countries. Tanzania’s strategic location within the region provides   opportunities to become a business center and transport hub for the Great Lakes   countries.   e) Harness and utilize more effectively the tourist potential to generate more income,   employment, and foreign exchange (leveraging the Royal Tour).   f)   Promoting a technology-driven economy, which should focus on the following: - An efficient innovation system (of firms, research centers, universities, consultants,   and other organizations)  - To tap into the growing stock of global knowledge, assimilate and adapt it to local   needs. - Create new technology that meets the needs of the economy. - STI education is to be prioritized from the early years of education. - Establish and use modern information technologies by availing communication   networks to the public (extend and promote the use of the National ICT Broadband   Backbone) to meet domestic demand as well as regional and international business   requirements.   g) Since infrastructure projects need huge amounts of financial resources, the Government   should identify and focus on strategic areas of investment in infrastructure that have a   rapid multiplier effect in accelerating economic growth. Encourage private sector   development, with emphasis on the following: - Local private sector. - Foreign investment. - Joint ventures and other forms of complementarity between local and foreign   investment.   35   Rural electrification through the country-wide REA project offers the requisite energy needs.   119 | Page   - Public-private partnership (PPP) and other forms of complementarity between the   public and private sectors. - Formalization of economic activities. - Improve the business environment and rationalize regulation for all. The Government   should fully implement the Blueprint for Regulatory Reforms to Improve the Business   Environment (BRRIBE), published by the Ministry of Industry and Trade. - Encourage entrepreneurship development and growth to achieve competitiveness   and a broad-based private sector.    h) Need to strengthen the application of PPP frameworks in resource mobilization and   implementation of development projects. It is recommended that the government adopt a   private sector-centric approach at all times, maintain consistent policies to instill   confidence among the private sector for joint PPP implementation, enhance human   capacity for PPP project preparation, including the development of bankable PPP project   proposals, and engage credible transaction advisors to guide PPP implementation.   Additionally, private sector development should be promoted and made more inclusive   by:   • Creating a conducive environment for businesses to operate and expand, as part of   efforts to increase the tax base and employment opportunities.   • Establishing a supportive legal and regulatory framework, developing policies and   strategies, and making direct investments in infrastructure and other services that   support business initiation and operations.   • Expediting the establishment of one-stop service centers to provide all necessary   services for starting and conducting business.   • Ensuring policy consistency and predictability for starting and running businesses.   • Facilitating regular dialogues between the government and the private sector during   the formulation of business regulations and operations to build trust.   • Prioritizing the provision of basic infrastructure, particularly the distribution of   electricity and other utilities, in key production areas to encourage investment and   reduce production costs.   i)   j)   There is a need for prioritizing local content in all engagements: promoting employment,   capacity building, technology transfer and development, local value additions, linkages to   the domestic economy, unpackaging large projects to facilitate local participation, and   linkages to communities.   Continue to invest in hard (e.g., power, railways, maritime) and soft (e.g., optic fiber   network) infrastructure.   k) Strengthen land administration, including land use planning, surveys, and titling.   l)   Hasten implementation of the National Identity Project (NIDA), which is vital in business   registration, tax administration and land titling.    120 | Page   m) Prioritize public and private investment in sectors with a high propensity to create and   propel job creation, in particular agriculture.    n) Balancing economic and population growth rates: The economic growth rate of 6-7   percent achieved during the last 23 years was not inclusive enough as the rate of   poverty reduction has been prolonged. The population growth rate increased from 2.8 to   3.2 percent. In contrast, the agricultural sector, which supports more than two-thirds of   the population, grew by about four percent, therefore having a minimal impact on the real   incomes of the growing population. The balance between economic growth and   population requires some strategic rethinking so that the former can have some   meaningful impact on the population. Two options are available: to achieve higher GDP   growth rates in sectors that impact most of the population than have been achieved so   far or reduce the population growth rate to cope with the economic growth rate and have   more impact on real income.   o) Expand investment financing of public banks, ensuring they are adequately capitalized.    p) Identify new and dynamic sectors that have emerged recently and have huge potential to   grow and transform the lives of many citizens. Examples of these sectors are the   creative industry (such as sports, music, and film) and the blue economy.    q) Hasten the establishment of special economic zones in each region.   r) Education and skill development will require a focus on the following areas: - An education system that blends theoretical with practical education at all levels   (create skilled than an educated generation). - Skill development that anticipates the changing demands of the economy and   imperatives of competitiveness regionally and globally. - Prepare graduates for both employability and self-employment. - Teach morals and ethics. - Institutionalization of high-flyer e-program to train in top universities and practical   training in competitive industries in technology-leading countries. - Strike an appropriate balance or mix between highly specialized skills, tertiary/ higher   education, diplomat/technical level, and artisan level skills.   s) Shape a learning society, a society that creates, shares, and uses knowledge for   development and competition. A learning society which is confident and that learns from   its own development experience and that of others and owns and determines its   development agenda. As indicated earlier, there has been no clear strategy that has   been adopted to go beyond levels of enrolment in schools and higher institutions of   learning and address the challenge of creating a learning society that is engaging in   continuous learning (e.g., through improved access to adult education and libraries in   urban and rural areas), formulating national strategies for enhancing creativity,   innovativeness and creating a confident society.    121 | Page   6.1.6. Climate Change and Environment   a) Capacity building of existing institutions in human resources to deal with the causes and   impacts of climate change (CC).   b) Provide adequate financial resources to respective institutions for CC adaptation and   mitigation measures.   c) Enhance support for promoting sustainable use of natural resources.   d) Prepare and adopt a national green growth policy and strategy.   e) Prepare and adopt a national blue economic growth policy and strategy.    f)   Promote the use of low-carbon energy sources (e.g., natural gas), alternative energy   (e.g., wind and solar) and renewable energies (e.g., hydropower, bioenergy).   g) Promote investments in sustainable waste management, especially in urban areas.   6.1.7. Digital Transformation   a) Capacity building in digital transformation (IT application, artificial intelligence, cloud   computing, internet of things, robotics, edge computing, social media platforms).   b) Investment in last-mile connectivity of the national ICT broadband backbone optic fiber   network.    c) Promote connectivity to the national ICT broadband backbone network.   d) Promote local production of ICT hardware and software.    e) Invest in community-based ICT facilities/kiosks.   f)   Investment in cyber security.   6.1.8. Optimizing Tanzania’s Strategic Geographical Location   The country is strategically positioned as a gateway for more than 8 countries in Eastern,   Central and Southern Africa. Continued and concerted efforts will have to be made to   improve service delivery to those countries in handling their imports, exports, and passenger   travel. Smart investments are required in the following areas:   a) Modernized sea/lake ports and airports with facilities to handle all types of goods.   b) Modernized and safe railways and road networks.   c) Modernized sea vessels and train wagons.   122 | Page   d) Capacity building of smart logistics services companies.    e) ICT investments for efficient communication and electronic cargo tracking.   f)   6.2   Simplification of movement of persons from neighboring countries engaged in transport   logistics.    Implementation   a) Establish a robust Communication and Dissemination Strategy and Action Plan to   ensure that TDV2050 is understood and owned by all stakeholders in society. This is   important to avoid the shortfalls in TDV2025, whereby 91.3 percent of respondents   believed Tanzanians knew nothing or very little about it (Figure 49). More than one-third   of the interviewed sample of stakeholders indicated to have heard for the first time some   15 or more years after it was launched (Figure 50).   Figure 50: Proportion (%) of Tanzanians   aware of TDV2025 (n=187)   Source: Field data 2023    Figure 51: Time when the sampled respondents heard about   TDV2025 for the first time (%) (n=30)   Source: Field data 2023   The recommended means for dissemination and creating awareness about TDV2050 to be   considered include mass media channels (electronic (e.g., radio, television, and social   media) and print media (e.g., books, newspapers, booklets, and pamphlets) as well as   physical encounters (e.g., public meetings and seminars) (Figure 51).   123 | Page   Figure 52: Means for Communication and Dissemination of Vision Document   Source: Field data 2023   b) Ensure that the process of MEL framework is used to track down progress towards the   realization of the Development Vision goals. This will require the development of specific   performance benchmarks and measurable outputs to assist in monitoring the process of   implementing the Development Vision goals. It is also critically important to establish and   effectively implement a review system of the Development Vision every five years to   gauge how the nation is faring and what adjustments need to be made as part of a   regular evaluation and monitoring exercise.   124 | Page   REFERENCES    AfDB/OECD, African Economic Outlook (Various Years)   African Political Economy Vol. 23, No. 67,  pp. 67-74.   Asian Development Bank (2000) ‘Civil Society and Non-Governmental Organizations’, in   ADB, To Serve and to Preserve. (Hanoi: ADB).   AU, 2015, Agenda 2063. The Africa We Want.   BoT, Annual Report (Various Years)   BoT/ZIPA/OCGS, Zanzibar Investment Report (Various Years)   Dunn, J. (1986), “The Politics of Representation and Good Government in Post-Colonial   Africa” in P. Chabal, (ed.), Political Domination in Africa: Reflections on Limits of Power   (Cambridge: CUP).   ESRF, Review of the Tanzania Development Vision 2025 (Final Report), 30th May 2011   Global Integrity (2019), https://www.transparency.org/en/countries/Tanzania accessed July   1st, 2023.    Harsch, E. (1996) Global Coalition for Africa: Towards a Broader Dialogue? In Review of    Hyden, Goran (1992), “Governance and the Study of Politics” in Goran Hyden and Michael   Bratton (eds.), Governance and Politics in Africa (Boulder: Lynne Rienner).   Idris, I. (2018). Mapping Women’s Economic Exclusion in Tanzania. K4D Helpdesk Report.   Brighton,   UK:   Institute   of   Development   https://opendocs.ids.ac.uk/opendocs/handle/20.500.12413/13793    Studies.   JDI, Tanzania Mini-Tiger Plan 2020 (Final Report), December 2004 Journal, Special Edition,   October 2003, p. 41. June 2011   Kisanga Robert Justice (2005) Global Integrity, 2006 Country Report, March 2016   Macrotrends (2023). Tanzania Education Spending 1996-2022. (Retrieved 2023-10-12)   https://www.macrotrends.net/countries/TZA/tanzania/education-spending   Macrotrends (2023). Tanzania Healthcare Spending 2000-2023. (Retrieved 2023-10-12).   https://www.macrotrends.net/countries/TZA/tanzania/healthcare-spending   Macrotrends (2023). Tanzania Maternal Mortality Rate 2000-2023. (Retrieved 2023-10-12).   https://www.macrotrends.net/countries/TZA/tanzania/maternal-mortality-rate   Media Council of Tanzania (MCT) (2022): State of the Media in Tanzania 2020-2021   MoFEA Guidelines for Preparation of the Budget/Plan,   MoFP, Midterm Review of the Implementation of the Istanbul Programme of Action for LDCs   for the Decade 2011-2020 - Tanzania Country Report, March 2021   MoFP, National Five-Year Development Plan (FYDP II) 2016/17 – 2020/21,    125 | Page   MoFP, National Five-Year Development Plan (FYDP III) 2021/22 – 2025/26,    Mwaikusa, J. T., (1996) ‘Party Systems and the Control of Government Powers: Past   Experiences, Future Prospects’ in Oloka-Onyago, K. Kibwana and C.M. Peter (eds.), Law   and the Struggle for Democracy in East Africa (Nairobi: Claripress): 70-85.   Napoleancat (2022): Facebook users in Tanzania   NBS, National Accounts of Tanzania Mainland (Various Years)   NBS, Tanzania in Figures (Various Years)   NBS, Tanzania Statistical Abstract (Various Years)   NBS/OCGS, Tanzania Population and Housing Census 2022 Report (2022 PHC),   NEPAD (2002), Country Self-Assessment for the APRM (Midrand SA: NEPAD Secretariat).   Newton, J. (2016). Making Social Protection Gender Sensitive for Inclusive Development in   Sub-Saharan   Africa.   INCLUDE.   https://includeplatform.net/wp  content/uploads/2019/07/INCLUDE-GRF-Newton-Making-Social-Protection-Gender  Sensitive.pdf   OCGS, Zanzibar in Figures (Various Years)   OCGS, Zanzibar National Accounts (Various Years)   OCGS, Zanzibar Statistical Abstract, (Various Years)    POPC ~ Macroeconomic Policy Framework for the Plan/Budget   POPC, Composite Development Goal for the Tanzania Development Vision 2025, February   2000   POPC, The Tanzania Five Year Development Plan (FYDP I) 2011/12 – 2015/16,    POPP ~ The Economic Survey (2021). Preliminary Results, October 2022   REPOA, Poverty and Human Development Report - PHDR (Various Years)   RGZ, 2019/20 Household Budget Survey. Office of the Chief Government Statistician,    Ministry of Finance and Planning  Zanzibar, Ministry of Finance and Planning. December,   2020.   Shivji, I.G. ‘Constitutional Limits on Parliamentary Powers’ in The Tanganyika Law Society    TCRA (Tanzania Communications Regulatory Authority) (2021), 2021 Country Data   TEMCO, 2005, TEMCO Newsletter: Mainland Update, Vol. 2, No. 7 April.   The Tanzania Commission for Universities (2023): Vital stats on University Education in   Tanzania 2022   TIC/NBS, Tanzania Investment Report (Various Years)   UNDP (1997), Re-conceptualizing Governance Discussion Paper No. 2 (New York: UNDP).   126 | Page   UNDP’s 2004 Evaluation of Project on Strengthening Capacities to Combat Corruption in   Tanzania.   United Nations (2022). World Population Prospects 2022. Department of Economic and   Social Affairs. Population Division. New York. https://population.un.org/wpp/   Dar   es   United Republic of Tanzania (2008). National AIDS Spending Assessment in Tanzania   2005/06.   Salaam.   Ministry   of   Health   and   https://data.unaids.org/pub/report/2005/NASA_Tanzania_2005_en.pdf   Social   Welfare.   United Republic of Tanzania (2015). National Panel Survey 2010-2015. Dodoma. National   Bureau of Statistics.   United Republic of Tanzania (2017). Demographic and Health Survey 2017. Dodoma.   National Bureau of Statistics.   PORALG.   United Republic of Tanzania (2018a). Basic Education Statistical Abstract 2004-2017.   Dodoma.   https://www.tamisemi.go.tz/storage/app/media/uploaded  files/BEMIS_ABSTRACT 2017 - 08-05-2018.pdf   United Republic of Tanzania (2018b). Household Budget 2018/19. Dodoma. National Bureau   of Statistics.   United Republic of Tanzania (2022). Integrated Labor Force Survey 2020/21. Dodoma.   National Bureau of Statistics.   United Republic of Tanzania (2023). Basic Education Statistics Tanzania. Dodoma.   PORALG. https://www.tamisemi.go.tz/singleministers/basic_education_data_2023   URT (1999) The National Framework on Good Governance (Dar es Salaam: POPC)   URT (2015) Homegrown Perceived and Quantitative Anti-corruption Efforts and Corruption   Indicators (2015).    URT (2016) Annual PCCB Implementation Report (2014/15).   URT (2017) National Anti-Corruption Strategy and Action Plan Phase III: 2017-2022 (Dar es   Salaam: President’s Office).   URT (2018) Blueprint for Regulatory Reforms to Improve the Business Environment   (Dodoma: Ministry of Industry, Trade, and Investment).   URT (2022) Evaluation of the National Anti-Corruption Strategy and Action Plan Phase   Three (NACSAP III) 2017-2022   URT (United Republic of Tanzania) (2010): Education Sector Development Programme,   Secondary Education Development Programme II, 2010-2015, Ministry of Education and   Vocational Training    URT (United Republic of Tanzania) (2011): 50 Years of Communications in Tanzania, TCRA   URT (United Republic of Tanzania) (2013): Assessment Report on Migration from Analogue   to Digital Broadcasting and Analogue Switch-Off Processes in Tanzania, TCRA   127 | Page   URT (United Republic of Tanzania) (2020): Pre-Primary, Primary, Secondary, Adult and   Non-Formal Education Statistics, President's Office Regional Administration and Local   Government   URT (United Republic of Tanzania) (2021): Five-Year Rolling Strategic Plan 2021/2022 –   2025/2026, NECTA   URT (United Republic of Tanzania) (2022): 2021 Tanzania in Figures, National Bureau of   Statistics (NBS)    URT (various), See, The National Defence Act, Cap. 192 R.E 2002; The National Service   Act, Cap 193 R.E 2002; The Prisons Act, Cap 47 R.E 2002; and The Police Force and   Auxiliary Services Act, Cap 322.   URT, (2000) ‘Composite Goal for the Tanzania Development Vision 2025’ Part One. (Dar es   Salaam, Planning Commission.   URT, (2009) National Governance and Corruption Survey (Dar es Salaam: PCCB,   President’s Office).   URT, (2011) NACSAP II Completion and Evaluation Reports.    URT, (2022) Evaluation of The National Anti-Corruption Strategy and Action Plan Phase   Three (NACSAP III) 2017-2022. Final Evaluation Report (Dodoma: PCCB, POSH).   URT, FYDP III 2021/22-2025/26. Realizing Competitiveness and Industrialization for Human   Development. Ministry of Finance and Planning. June, 2021.   URT, HBS, 2017-18. National Bureau of Statistics, Ministry of Finance and Planning. June   2019.   World Bank (2018). World Development Indicators Tanzania. Washington DC. World Bank.   https://databank.worldbank.org/reports.aspx?source=2&country=TZA   World   Bank (2022). Pre-primary school enrollment (% gross) Tanzania.   https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SE.PRE.ENRR?locations=TZ (accessed 12/07/2023)   World Bank (2023). World Bank open data. Washington DC. World Bank.   https://data.worldbank.org/    128 | Page   129 | Page      LIST OF ANNEXES   ANNEX 1:  SUMMARY OF ANTI-CORRUPTION ACTIONS IN   TANGANYIKA/TANZANIA UP TO JULY 2023   Year Action Taken   1958 Prevention of Corruption Ordinance   1971 Prevention of Corruption Act (amended 2002)   1974 Anti-Corruption Squad under the Ministry of Home Affairs   1983 Economic Sabotage Act   1984 Economic and Organized Crime Control Act   1990 Prevention of Corruption Bureau (Oversight moved from Home Affairs to President’s Office)   1995 November, His Excellency Benjamin William Mkapa, elected president, publicly declares his   assets   1995 Public Leadership Code of Ethics Act.   1996 Presidential Commission Against Corruption produces the “Warioba Report” on corruption.   2000 National Anti-Corruption Strategy and Action Plan (NACSAP) launched.   2004 Public Procurement Act No. 21 of 2004   2006 Anti-Money Laundering Act, Economic and Organized Crimes Control Act.   2007 Prime Minister Edward N Lowassa resigned over the Richmond affair.   2008 Public Audit Act No. 11 of 2008   2008 March: Edward Hoseah was elected Chairman of the East African Association of Anti  Corruption Authorities.   2008 Basil Mramba and Daniel Yona were arraigned over the Alex Stewart gold essaying scandal.   2008 NACSAP II (2008-2011) launched.   2009 NGACS 2009 launched   2010 Election Expenses Act No. 10 of 2010   2015 September Whistleblowers Protection Act.   2015 Basil Mramba and Daniel Yona were sentenced to three years in jail and payment of Tsh 5   million each.   2015 16th December: President Magufuli replaces PCCB Director General Edward Hoseah with   Valentino Mlowola.   2016   The establishment of a High Court Division dealing with Corruption and Economic Crimes as   established by Rule 4(1) of the Economic and Organized Crime Control (The Corruption and   Economic Crimes Division) (Procedure) Rules, 2016   2017   14th May, land houses and other property worth Tsh 3.6 billion belonging to Godfrey Gugai,   PCCB’s Chief Accountant, were frozen pending investigations into how they were acquired.   Reported by Faustine Kapama 2017. ‘PCCB accountant risks losing 3.6 bn worth of houses,   vehicles, Daily news on 15 May.   2017   19th June: PCCB arraigned James Rugemalila and Harbinder Singh Sethi over the Escrow   affair,   https://ippmedia.com/en/news/iptl-barons-nabbed   2017 24th August: Brigadier General Joh Julius Mbungo appointed PCCB’s Deputy Director   General,   20016/17 NACSAP III Phase launched   2020 NGACS-II 2020 launched.   Source: A Review of the Performance of Tanzania’s Prevention and Combating of Corruption   Bureau, 2007-16 at pg. 8-9   130 | Page   ANNEX 2: LIST OF REVIEWED DOCUMENTS   Publication/Report Application in the Review process   Five-Year Development Plans (3 plans, with the 3rd   plan ending in 2025/26).   Cross-cutting: All goals of TDV 2025   Previous TDV 2025 Reviews: 2009 and 2011   (ESRF).      Country report on Agenda 2063.    Composite Development Goal of the Tanzania   Development Vision 2025.      Development Vision Documents from other countries   such as Kenya, Uganda, Rwanda, Ethiopia, Brazil,   Malaysia, Singapore, Vietnam, and PR China.      The current and past East African Community Vision   2050 and Development Strategies.      Big Results Now (BRN).    Economics Survey Reports.    Public Expenditure Review Reports.    National Panel Survey Reports.    Reform Programme Reports.    Documents Relevant for TDV 2025 Goal 1     MKUKUTA implementation reports. Review of TDV 2025 Goal 1: Poverty reduction,   food security, health, water, education, etc.   SDGs and MDGs Implementation Reports.    Poverty and Human Development Reports.    Different Governance indices as published by   different raters like the Chandler Good Government   Index, World Governance Indicators, etc.      African Union Peer Review Mechanism (APRM)   Tanzania Reports      Tanzania Demographic and Health Surveys.    Reports on National Policy Dialogues (Previously   Poverty Policy Week).      Ruling Political Party’s Election Manifestos (2000,   2010 and 2020).      Sector-specific policies for the social services sector,   including but not limited to the following:      Health policy and programs.    Education, e.g., Primary Education Development   Programme (PEDP), Secondary Education   Development Programme (SEDP), Adult and   Non-formal Education Sub-sector Medium Term   Strategy.      Role of Development Partners like Tanzania   Assistance Strategy (TAS).    131 | Page   Publication/Report Application in the Review process   Partnerships, e.g., Public-Private Partnership   Policy.    Gender: Youth and women empowerment   strategies.    Documents Relevant for TDV 2025 Goal 2   CAG Reports Review of Goal 2 of TDV 2025: Good governance,   rule of law, ethics, integrity   Ruling Political Party’s Election Manifestos (2000,   2010 and 2020).      National Anti-corruption Strategy Action Plan    National Governance and Anti-Corruption Survey    Public Sector Integrity Survey    African Union Peer Review Mechanism (APRM)   Tanzania Reports      International Transparency Reports    Documents relevant for TDV 2025 Goal 3   SADC Indicative Development Strategy. Review of Goal 3 of TDV 2025: Economic Growth,   Industrialization, Competitive and Inclusive   Economy, Attainment of Middle-Income Status   Business Environment and Investment Climate   Blueprint.      Regional Investment Guides.    Sector-specific policies for the productive sector,   including but not limited to the following:      Industrialization, e.g., Sustainable Industrial   Development Policy.    Agricultural value chain development (e.g.,   Agricultural Sector Development Strategy (ASDS)   and Agricultural Sector Development Programme   (ASDP).      Policies and strategies on Marketing, Trade   Export policy.    Role of Development Partners like Tanzania   Assistance Strategy (TAS).    Partnerships, e.g., Public-Private Partnership   Policy.    Digitization of public services and economic   transactions, e.g., ICT development, e-banking,   Mobile-money, and e-Government.      Mini-Tiger Plan 2020.    Global Doing Business Report, Chapters on   Tanzania and Middle-Income Countries.    Household Budget surveys undertaken since 2000.    Ease of Doing Business Reports (Various years).    Kilimo Kwanza Document (2009).       132 | Page   133 | Page   ANNEX 3: LIST OF PARTICIPANTS CONSULTED IN THE EVALUATION   EXERCISE   Zonal Workshop-Western Zone (Tabora)   Na Jina Jinsia Taasisi Kazi   1 Samweli.G.Neligwa Me SIDO-Tabora Meneja Wa Mkoa   2 Bayaga N. Lucas Me Kigoma-RS Mchumi   3 Frank M. Charles Me Ras-Kigoma AAS-PC   4 Ngassa Lunegeja Me TRA-Tabora Ofisa Mwandamizi   5 Dkt. Ildefonce Mkama Me AMUCTA Mhadhiri   6 Godfrey Hegani Me RUWASA Ag RM   7 Jamail.M. Songanzila Me Baraza La Vijana   Tabora Mwenyekiti   8 Prudence Kweyamba Me NMB-Tabora Ag.BM   9 Gabriel A. Gewe Me National Bureau of   Statistics (NBS) RSM   10 Amina H. Madeleka Fe TWCC Ushauri Biashara   11 Fredric.A. Me RS-Tabora RS   12 Khalfan.M. Khalfan Me Shiuma Biashara   13 Felix Thomas Nyaulingo Me Uvinza DC Mchumi   14 Juliana Wionls Bulinda Fe Takukuru Afisa Uchunguzi    15 Frednard S Filimbi Me RS- Kigoma-   Ujiji Mchumi   16 Eng.Joram. Kamalamo Me Tanroads   Tabora   Mkuu wa Kitengo   Cha Matengenezo   17 Kassongo. K. Mirambo Me TCCIA Tabora Mwenyekiti (Mkoa)   18 Janeth Alfred Me PEDICAME-Tabora Ofisa Msaidizi   19 Donatus Rupoli Fe PEDICAME-Tabora Mkurugenzi   Mtendaji PEDICAME   20 Maulid Rashidi Me Madhehebu-Islam Sheikh Wilaya   21 Fr. John Kulwa Me RC- Tabora Padre   22 Nelson N. Ntabaye Me Tanesco Tabora Office   23 Pendo.J. Challo Fe Chadema JOC   24 Hamphrey D Kulwa Me DC Uyui Mchumi   25 Nelson G. Mwankiya Me Tabora Mc Mchumi   26 Frank Julius Nguvumali Me Kigoma/Ujiji MC Afisa Mipango      FGDs- Kigoma (Kigoma MC/Ujiji)   No Name Gender Institution Position   1 Juster Kitandala Fe Mfugaji Mfugaji   2 Nyafulu Masatu Me Mfanya Biashara Mfanya Biashara   3 Mahmoud.E. Ngumba Me Shiuma Mjasiriamali   4 Kisekwa.T.Mapunda Me B.M.U Mvuvi   5 Abel Mayeye Me B.M.U Mvuvi   6 Makalius.J. Nziganyije Me Ufugaji Mfugaji   7 Hemedi Moshi Me KIVIDEA Mratibu Vijana   8 Haruna Ramadhan Me BAKWATA Sheikh   9 Rev.Fidel Mbiha Me CCT Mchugaji   10 Ally Jafari Me Machinga Mjasiriamali   134 | Page   No Name Gender Institution Position   11 John S.Masekenya Me Kilimo Mkulima   12 Zabroni Hebeye Me Kilimo Mkulima   13 Fatuma Rashidi Fe Biashara Mfanya Biashara   14 Shoma Kashiri Fe KKD Katibu Wa Kikundi   15 Edward Saimon Me CSO-Kioo Mkurugenzi      FGDs - Kigoma (Uvinza DC)   No Name Gender Institution Position   1 Godrey Msota Me Mchimbaji Madini   2 Frolence Cyprian Joel Ke Kikundi M/Kiti   3 Ramadhan Said Me Coop Union-Uvinza Mtetezi   4 Nyambo Matoboki Me Mfugaji Ufugaji   5 Ladislaces Luhorza Me Mfugaji Mukulima   6 Devid Chobliku Me Mfugaji Ufugaji   7 Shaban.H. Seleman Me Bakwata Shekhe   8 Hamisi.Z.Hasani Me Mwenyekiti Kikundi Dereva wa Bodaboda   9 Bakari Mfaume Me Mvuvi Mvuvi   10 Bakarimfaume Me Ufugaji Mfugaji   11 Yohana Nkolaningwa Me Asasi Za Kijamii Mfugaji Nyuki   12 Swabiru Mussa Me Mwenyekiti Chawawiu Mvuvi   13 Romania Mboge Ke Machinga Machinga   14 Robani Mihayo Me Seremala Fundi Seremala   15 Mgeni Omari Me CSO Mkurugenzi      FGDs - Tabora (Tabora MC)   No Name Gender Institution Position   1 Manganga Mzuga Me Shiuma Biashaara   2 Boniface Kimaro Me Machiga Biashara   3 Bernard Mrigo Me Walemavu Mjasiliamali   4 Hassan Issa Me Tabora FIS Biashara   5 Ashura Mwazembe Fe Wanawake Jukwaa Mjasiriamali   6 Joachim.W. Milambo Me Youth Relief Foundation Kiongozi   7 Emmanuel Kafu Me Wafugaji Mfugaji   8 Hellena Mathai Fe CSO Mtoa Ushauri   9 Jackson Msengi Me Mkulima Mkulima   10 Kiwele Lazaro Me Mkulima Mfugaji   11 Albert Vitalu Nkuba Me Vijana (Mwakilishi) Biashara   12 Daudi Mbao Me Mkulima Kilimo   13 Pearson Kavana Me Mstaafu Kilimo      FGDs - Tabora (Tabora MC)   No Name Gender Institution Position   1 Shaban H.Bundu Me Mkulima Mkulima   2 Benard Emmanuel Me Biashara Mkulima   3 Lugwisha Mwinamila Me Ufugaji Mfugaji   4 Anastazia Michael Fe Mkulima Bustani   5 Magreti Joriz Fe Mkulima Mkulima   135 | Page   No Name Gender Institution Position   6 Mwajuma Jumanne Fe Uyui Para-legal Mkurugenzi   7 Vincent Chacha Me Mkulima Mkulima   8 Mrisho Me Politician Politician      KIIs-Kigoma Region   No Name Gender Institution Position   1 Mr. Frank Charles Me HOD PC   Kigoma Region   Assistant Administrative Secretary   Responsible For Planning And   Coordination (AAS-PC)   2 Mr. Ferdinand Filimbi Me HOD PC- Ujiji   Mc   Municipal Planning and   Coordination Officer (PCO)   3 Edward Simon Me CSO Executive Director   4 Ms. Mgeni Omari Kakolwa Fe Political Leader Deputy Mayor   5 Dr. Abigael Mika Fe Retire Officer Doctor   6 Mr. Felix Nyauringo Me Hod PC- Uyui   MC   District Council Planning and   Coordination Officer (PCO)   7 Mr. Samuel Kayanda Me Private Sector Communication Officer   8 Ms. Margareth Thomas Fe CSO Retired Agriculture Officer   9 Mr. Mandela Kaboko Seif Me Political Leader Politician (CCM) Chairperson   10 Mr. Godfrey Selestine   Baliolugulu,   Me Private Sector Private Sector Representative   (TCCIA)      KIIs-Tabora Region   No Name Gender Institution Position   1 Mr. Asanterabi Sangenoi Me Hod Pc Tabora   Region   Assistant Administrative   Secretary Responsible for   Planning and Coordination (Aas  Pc)   2 Mr. Nelson Mwankina Me Hod Pc Tabora   Mc   Planning and Coordination   Officer (PCO)   3 Mr. Vicent Chacha, Me Retired Officer Retired Officer Uyui   4 Piason Jenathan Kavana Me Retired Officer Mechanical Foreman   5 Mr. Timothy Chombo Me Private Sector Director Caritas Tabora   6 Braison Mgala Me Private Sector Headmaster   7 Mwajuma Jumanne Fe Cso Executive Director   8 Hamphrey D Kulwa Me Hod Pc-Uyui   Dc   Planning and Coordination   Officer (PCO)   9 Mr. Mrisho Amani Masambaki Me Political   Leader   District Councilor   10 Mr. Nasir Issa Mnenge Me Political   Leader   Mayor      FGDs - Dar es Salaam Region   Na. Jina Taasisi Kazi Yako   1. Mussa M. Sanze UWAWADA Katibu   2. Salma M. Fubwe Chama Cha Mapinduzi (CCM)   Siasa Siasa   3. Jokha Salim Al Mahanjumati Group Mwenyekiti   4. Shekh Mustafa Ngairi Dini(Islam) Shekh   5. Feisal M. Mvuvi Mvuvi   136 | Page   Na. Jina Taasisi Kazi Yako   6. Khamisi Matulanga Halmashauri Jiji Dsm Mchumi   7. Hemedi Abdul Mfugaji Biashara   8. Julius Ndele Dar City Mchumi   9. Robert M. John Chuo Kikuu Huria Mwanafunzi   10. Mohammed Lugewe Halmashauri Ya Jiji Dsm Dereva   11. Georgis. Steven Assenga Halmashauri Ya Jiji Dsm Afisa Maendeleo   12. Daogratius David Nyaisa Good Hope Group Mfanyabiashara/   13. Gloria Mleli Mattoke Machinga Complex Mjasiliamali/Batiki   14. Clementina Mayemba Amazing Project Mjasiliamali   15. Neema J. Mtei Neema Organic Mkulima   16. Halima Kinabo Moneza Group Majasilimali   17. Hemedi Adul Mfugaji Mjasiliamali   18 Theonestina Mwasha Fadev Katibu Mtendaji   19 Paulina Festo Nawile Uvuvi Mjasiriamali   20 Abdallah S Lema Machinga Mfanyabiashara   21 Al Karim Bhanji Lhro Mfanyabiashara   22 Abdulah E Tairo Tampro SACCOS Mikopo   23 Ismaili K  Biashara   24 Rashidi Athumani  Mwashi   25 Maria Ganji Kila Shivyawata Mjasiliamali   26 Zainabu Mokadi  Mjasiliamali   27 Tiberius Mario Timasu Timasu   28 Asia Halifa Omary Mpakani Tunaweza   Organization NGO   29 Yahya R. Mwahu Mwakilishi Wa Dini Shekhe   30 Daudi S. Laurent Miche Na Maua Bustani ya Miche Na   Maua   31 Rehema K. S  Mjasiriamali   32 Emelia Simon Mdau Accountant (CPA)      KIIs- Dar es Salaam   Na Jina Taasisi   1 Ms. Zakia Msangi WILDAF   2 Mr. Salum Haidary Rehani    3 Mr. Jabir Mohamed Chilumba Municipal   4 Mr. Ford Chisongera RAS Office   5 Mr. Ally Mohamed Hassan Ubungo Municipal   6 Ms. Astrider Kusaga Asuta   7 Andambike Kyoma Ubungo Municipal   8 Mr. Abdullah Education Officer   9 Abdallah Ahmed Kitumbi Local Government   10 Pastor Enock Patrick Fedha AICT   11 Julius Ndele    12 Robert Moses John Ilala CC   13 Moze Omary    14 Raila S Kigambaoni MC   15 Rahma Shekwavi Ilala CC   16 Ramadhani Njama Juma Msikitini   137 | Page   Na Jina Taasisi   17 Sheikh Zailai Hassani Mkoyogore, BAKWATA   18 Estrida Kussaga, ASATA (NGO)   19 Wasiwasi Baharia    20 Fidelia Kyando    21 Juma Mkenga    22 Elizabeth Mdalangwila Temeke Municipal Council      KIIs- Kilimanjaro (Moshi MC)   Na Jina Jinsia Kazi/Taasisi   1 Charles.J.Lymo Me Diwani Kata Ya Msangara   2 ConstantineMtiti Me Office Of the Planning Officer   3 Salum Rashidi Me Mwenyekiti Wa Wamiliki Wa Bodaboda   4 Hellen.A.Usiri Me Mstaafu   5 Edmund Me Chairperson   6 Monica.C.Sana Ke HOD (Moshi)   7 Rashidi.O. Salu Me Mwakalishi wa Sekta Binafsi   8 Hellen.A.Usiri Me Mstaafu   9 Anna Ke Religious Leader/Pastor    10 Edmund Me Chairperson      KIIs-Arusha Region   Sn Jina Jinsia Kazi   1 Richard Nkini Me Afisa Mipango   2 Tebea Mollel Me Afisa utalii   3 Mohamed Me Mwakilishi sekta binafsi   4 Rashidi.O.Salu Me Katibu Wa Bodaboda   5 Edimund Me Mwenyekiti Wa Halmashauri Meru   6 Banka Seif Banka Me Katibu BAKWATA   7 Rose.M.Masawe Ke Afisa Kilimo   8 Vincent Uhege Me Voice of Youth Tz   9 Bakari Salum  CSO   10   Idara ya Madini      FGDs- Kilimanjaro (Hai DC)   Na Jina Taasisi/Kazi Jinsia   1 Muddy H Msali Biashara Me   2 Rose F Temu Mkulima Ke   3 Saumu S Swai Afisa Miradi Ke   4 Gropia J Assenga Palalegal Ke   5 Magret S. Mfuru Biashara Ke   6 Rahim S Mlombo Useremala Me   7 Elizabeth D Kivuyo Mjasiriamali Ke   8 Joyce S Loma Mkulima Ke   9 Hellen Ainea Usiri Mstaafu Elimu Ke   10 Seraphin J Kisasi Maliasili Mstaafu Ke   11 Catherine P Gidabayda Mchungaji Ke   138 | Page   Na Jina Jinsia Kazi Yako   1 Okero.B.Costantine Me Biashara   2 Furaha.J.Mwambene Ke Mkulima   3 Noel Kedmond Me Mjasiriamali   4 Denis .I.Malya Me Biashara   5 Chelsea.E.Mollel Ke Biashara   6 Hakim.A.Msemo Me Mjasiriamali   7 Neema.P.Naaman Ke Ushirika   8 Maria.B.Kalinga Ke Uvuvi   9 Catherine.C. Thobas Ke Mchumi   10 Daudi.R.Shegila Me Mhasibu   11 Nyagusi.L.Nailiba Me Mfanyabiashara   12 Joyce.L.Mollel Ke Ofisi Ya Mkuu Wilaya   13 Sauda Mpanyo Ke Mfanyabiashara   14 Frank.E.Abraham Me Mjasiriamali   15 Denis.D.Kimaro Me Mjasiriamali   16 Esther.S.Sikoroi Ke Mjasiriamali   17 Anastazialugala Ke Mjasiriamali   18 Felisha Gitao Ke Mjasiriamali   19 Theodoraselestini Me Mjasiriamali   20 Maneno.J.Maziku Me Mjasiriamali   21 Rose.M.Masawe Ke Afisa Kilimo   22 Vicent Uhega Me Voice Of Youthtz   FGDs-Kilimanjaro (Moshi MC)   Na. Jina Taasisi/Kazi Yako Jinsia   1 Evelyne Jacob Mushi Msindikaji Ke   2 Immaculata Mwigana Msaidizi Wakisheria M/Mjini Ke   3 Issa E Juma Mjasiria Mali/Mwanasiasa Me   4 Hamadi.B. Bendera Mjasiria Mali/Dereva Me   5 Isihaka H. Juma Mfanyabiashara Me   6 Salimu Kawawa Katibu Kundi La Walemavu Me   7 Ramadhani.H. Muna Mjasiria Mali Me      FGDs-Arusha Region   Na Jina Jinsia Kazi/Taasisi   1 Sekelaabdon Ke TANAPA   2 Timmdinga Me TATOA   3 Ntulimwakilembe Me ATC   4 Daniel Elibariki Me ICT   5 Andrew Soilell Me Ofisi Ya Mbunge Jimbo La Shule   6 Kofu I. Gabriel Me JMAT   7 Faig J. Tarakwa Me Oreteti,Loongaik-Marya   8 Mch. Juliustarakwa Me KKKT-Dayosisi ya Kaskazini   9 Blandina R. Nkini Ke RS-Arusha   10 Sheikh H. Said Me BAKWATA   11 Chelsea E. Mollel Ke Takwimu   12 Godlove Lameck Me Meru Flowers   13 Sarah F. Marandu Ke Meru Flowers   139 | Page   Na Jina Jinsia Kazi/Taasisi   14 Hawa H. Amani Ke RS Arusha   15 Naduvoy M. Naigisa Me RS Arusha   16 Antuonndos Ke DP   17 Frank Kimaro Me RS Arusha   18 Dr. Efraimkosia Me NA-AIST   19 Denis J. Malya Me Biashara   20 Nalemutamvisan Ke PWC   21 Nameloksangeti Me PWC   22 Simon P. Ngilisho Me RS- Arusha   23 Johnsonmahuma Me Demokrasia makini   24 Rahma I. Yusuph Ke ACT-Wazalendo   25 Sadiki O. Nangi Me UNDP   26 Magdale S. Masaka Me CHADEMA   27 Aunsu Y. Munisu Me CHADEMA   28 Heo Amos Me RS Arusha   29 Athanas Chenya Me Arusha DC   30 Peterlister Me TANESCO   31 Kanyibaloshle Me Arusha DC   32 Tumaini Msuya Me Arusha DC   33 Boay Francis Me TANROADS   34 Yesige Muyadwaa Me Hospitali Ya Mkoa Manyara   35 Joseph Zombwe Me LATRA   36 Onesimo Geofrey Mkuo Me Afisa Ardhi mkuu   37 Ansbert Mushema Me Driver-TANROADS    38 Linus Mboya  Mchumi    39 Gissbert Passian Me Sekta binafsi   40 Walter Alphonce Me Sekta Binafsi   41 Msafiri Masandu Me Advocate   42 Eligy Tengesi Me Dereva wa Boda Boda      KIIs- Mbeya and Iringa Regions   Na. Jina Taasisi Kazi Yako Region/District   1 Jeremiah Nyingulila   Iringa   2 Christopher   Kumzungala   Iringa/Mafinga TC   3 Chuki Jeremiah   Mbwanane   Iringa Municipal   Council Councillor    4 His Worship, The   Mayor Ally Ngwanda   Iringa Municipal   Council   Mayor of Iringa and   Councilor for Mshindo   Ward   Iringa/Iringa MC   5 Mr Owden B.   Kasongwa   Regional   Secretariat   Assistant Administrative   Secretary Planning and   Coordination   Iringa/Iringa MC   6 Mophen Gordon   Mwakajonga   Mbeya   7 Mr Raphael Simon   Ngogo Farmer Farmer Iringa/Mafinga TC   8 Rev, Dr Wallace   Howahowa Christian Church Religious Leader-Pastor Mbeya CC   9 Rev, Erick Sanzala Christian Church Pastor Mbeya   140 | Page   Na. Jina Taasisi Kazi Yako Region/District   10 Kasongwa B. Owden Iringa Rs Regional Planning Officer Iringa RS   11 Saluatory Emanuel   Ngerera Ccm Member Of District   Political Committee Iringa MC   12 Said Salimu Rubeya Ccm Chairperson Of CCM   Iringa Urban Iringa MC   13 Peter Felix Mtalo  Chairperson Regional   Business Community Iringa MC   14 Reginald Kiwango Mafinga Tc Planning Officer Mafinga TC   15 Gladness Mushi Sos Cv-Mafinga Assistant Project Officer Mafinga TC   16 Adueta Stambuli Yes Tanzania Programme Officer Mbeya CC   17 Martin William Kilasile - Retired Officer Mbarali DC   18 Elisha Elias   Mwanikawanga Ngo’s NGO Representative Mbarali DC   19 Salifu Elias Venance Mbarali Dc Planning Officer Mbarali DC   20 Ally Mnunduma   Abdallah Mbeya Cc Planning and Coordinator   Officer Mbeya CC   21 Emmanuel Kilundo Mbeya Rs Planning and Coordinator   Officer Mbeya RS      FGDs –Iringa (Iringa MC)   Na. Jina Taasisi Kazi Yako   1 Lukelo Mallumbo The Lord Father Company M/Mtendaji   2 Chande Mazola Ruaha Coti Mvuvi   3 Salim Ngoda Wasafirishaji Dereva   4 Shaibu Maruzuku Usafirishaji Katibu/Daladala   5 Christopher Mwakalinga Madini, Ujenzi Mjasiliamali Mjasiliamali Madini Ujenzi   6 Yanza A Mpelembwa M/Machinwa Biashara   7 Eddah.R. Mdemu Katibu Jukwaa La Wanawake Biashara   8 Leonard Mtega Mkulima Mkulima   9 Mudathir Yoyota Dhihureyn Kiongozi Wa Dini   10 Haruna Mwalembe Dini Mchungaji   11 Bovan. J. Mwakyambiki Nacongo Biashara   12 Mosses. Y. Kuppa M/Kiti-Wafugaji Mfugaji      FGDs -Mbeya (Mbeya Cc)   Na. Jina Taasisi Kazi Yako   1 Mboka Mwakajila Mbeya City Ag CD   2 Emmanuel Binya Mbeya City Mchumi   3 Aman Sango Mbeya Stendi Kuu Usafilishaji   4 Allico Mwanjute Ilomba Mkulima/Mfugaji   5 Jerry. N. Mwatebela Shiuma Mkoa Biashara   6 Shadrack Daimon Shiuma Soko Machinga   7 Damas.S. Mwambeje Shivyawata-Mbeya Jiji M/Kiti   8 Lilian.L. Kakoma Nsalaga Mkulima   9 Advera. S. Kahitwa Upendo Group Msindikaji   10 Margareth Nzowa Upendo Group Msindikaji   11 Halima Simfukwe Bakwata Katibu Juawakita   12 Emiliasi Njozi Wezesha Group Selemala   13 Christopher.H. Raziyo CPCT Katibu-Mchungaji.   141 | Page   Na. Jina Taasisi Kazi Yako   14 Bruno B Mpwago Ushirika M/Kiti      FGDs –Iringa (Mafinga TC)   Na. Jina Taasisi Kazi Yako   1 Peter Daniel Usafirishaji Dereva   2 Haruni Manga Usafirishaj Dereva   3 Matekelezachanga Mkulima Ukulima-Miti   4 Attilio Katefui Mkulima Ukulima   5 Abdallah.F. Mbilinyi Mkulima Ukulima   6 Christina Kiwale Mkulima Ukulima   7 Peter Heddi Mfanyabiashara Biashara   8 Moses John UWAMINA Biashara   9 Kepha.E. Malangalila  Biashara   10 Edson Dishon  Biashara   11 Elina E Sahihi  Mfugaji   12 Ebelina Z Mbwilo EAGTI Mama Mchungaji   13 Ajuaye Julius  Mfugaji   14 Nasra Salehe SOS Children Afisa Mradi      FGDs-Mbeya (Mbarali Dc)   Na. Jina Taasisi Kazi Yako   1 Edison E Mwakyembe RSCO Paralegal   2 Isaka Omary UVCCM Biashara   3 Kaizer Zabron Kijana Biashara   4 Elisha E Mwanikawaga Saliota Organization Mwakilishi Wa NGO’s Mbarali   5 Rahabu Kibona Kijana Mjasiliamali   6 Brasida Nyenyembe Wamakamu Mjasiriamali   7 Yahya. Mbwera N.I.M Shekhe   8 Rev.Paul Mwampamba Kanisa Mchungaji   9 Fidelisi Pendesa Mlowe  Mkulima   10 Givemoses Lowokelo Shivyawata Mkulima      Zonal Workshop-Southern Highlands (Mbeya)   Na. Jina Taasisi Kazi Yako   1 Dr. Felister Kisandu Afya_Mbeya Daktari   2 Joram Hongoli NACONGO-Njombe Mwalimu   3 Mussa Selemani RAS Njombe Afisa Mipango   4 Siphael Msigala J.W.T Biashara   5 James Sambuka Sohipo Coordinator   6 Salim.P. Mengi TCCIA-Mbeya Treasurer   7 Nuru.S. Timita MCC Mwanasheria   8 Binthony Kullinga Marmo Mtawala   9 Muhsin Mkongo Tccia-Chairman Commerce   10 Halima Mpita Songwe RS Mchumi Mkuu   142 | Page   11 Daria Rugumira ADP-Mbozi Mkurugenzi   12 Eliakimu Kaniugu Rs-Mbeya Elimu-Mbeya   13 Dr. Rose.J. Mongi GICA-Technology Mkurugenzi   14 Emile.B. Mpasi Ruwasa-Mbeya Afisa-Rasilimali   15 Elkana Lazaro Dini-KKKT Mchungaji   16 Rose. W. Kawilhe Nuru-Orphans Mlezi Mkuu   17 Dr. Julius.M. Kaijage Hospital Ya Mkoa Mwenyekiti Bodi   18 Anna Mwambene RS-Mbeya Biashara-Mbeya   19 Vicent D Kilindila Vigou Secondary Mkugurenzi      FGDs -Morogoro Region (Morogoro MC)   Na. Jina Taasisi Kazi Yako   1 Esperancy Kasogela Binafsi Mfugaji   2 Nyamisi Kitambulilo Kikundi Mfanya Biashara   3 Daama Mbaga Kumbukila Kikundi Ufugaji   4 Cecilia Ndashuka Binafsi Kijana   5 Mayasa .A.Mwinyi MMC Afisa Elimu Vifaa Takwimu   6 Martina Hezron Mmc PLO   7 Ally.A.Mshana Kikundi Msindikaji   8 Kennedy Shimbwe NGO PO   9 Matessa Rashidi Diwani Diwani   10 Fatuma Kow MMC Mjasiriamali   11 Puppa Joseph MMC Malfo   12 Rev. Reginald Mdugi Katibu CCT Mchungaji   13 Latifa Hamisi Muhode Binafsi Mfugaji   14 Zakia Sufiani Yusufu Binafsi Mafuta Ya Alizeti   15 Jofrey Kamwava Mmc Mchumi Mchumi   16 Juma Ndeka Binafsi Mjasiriamali   17 Stephene Malaka Binafsi Mfugaji/Samaki   18 Josephine Mushi Binafsi Mfugaji   19 Happy I Makumbo Binafsi Mfugaji   20 Omary A Kolloa MMC Afisa Usafirishaji      KIIs-Morogoro Region (Morogoro Mc)   Na. Jina Taasisi Kazi Yako   1 Ibrahim Ismael   Evance Gambishi   Mro Afisa Misitu, Nyuki Na Utalii   Mro Afisa Kilimo   2 Muyadhini Myanza TCCIA Mwenyekiti Mkoa   3 Jeremiah Lubeleje Mmc Afisa Mipango Manispaa Ya Morogoro   4 Oscar Patrick Chagula Shivyawata Mwenyekiti Mkoa: CSO For People With   Disabilities   5 Samwel Msuya Diwani, Mbuyuni Ward Political Leader   143 | Page   FGDs-Morogoro Region (Ifakara Tc)   Na. Jina Taasisi Kazi Yako   1 Christina Kulunge Kocd Mkurugenzi   2 Massepo. B. Mlala Diwani Mstaafu Mwanasiasa   3 Juliana. L.Mmassy Afisa Mifugo ITC   4 Dennis. J. Zlhepa Trade Officer ITC   5 Halawa.P. Kidaha Mkulima Mkulima   6 Mickdadi.R. Kajua CEMDO-Tz CEMDO Accountant   7 Gabriel B. Leshabari TCCIA Journalist   8 Sairis .A. Mbiro ITC Afisa Utumishi   9 Hadinani .I. Umtite ITC Afisa Elmu   10 Samson Ngwila TCCIA M/Kiti(W)   11 Ramadhani .R. Mayumba Bakisata Shekhe Wa Wilaya      KIIs-Morogoro Region (Ifakara TC)   Na. Jina Taasisi Kazi Yako   1. Christina Dominic   Karunge   NGO-Kilombero Organisation   For Community   Mwenyekiti   2. Maseko Benjamini Mlala Kata Ya Ifakara Diwani Mstaafu   3. Yusta Charamila Private Sector Upendo Group   4. Heri Kuria LGA: Ifakara Town Council Planning Officer And Acting   Head Of Planning And   Coordination At Ifakara   5. Advocate Magesa LGA: Kilombero District Human Resource And Was   Also The Acting Das      KIIs-Ruvuma Region (Songea MC)   Na. Jina Jinsia Taasisi Kazi Yako   1 Hassan Hamidu Niali Me Sonngo Mratibu   2 Michael L. Mbano Me Manispaa Mayor   3 Jumanna Mwankhoo Me Regional Secretariat Assistant Ras – Planning And   Coordination   4 Wilfred Lazaro Me Songea Municipal   Council Economist   5 Joseph M. Ngocho Me Songea Municipal   Council SME      KIIs-Ruvuma Region (Nyasa Dc)   Na. Jina Jinsia Taasisi Kazi Yako   1 Ajali Hassani Nkoma Me Nyasa District Council Councillor   2 Charles Liwata Me Anglican Church Reverend   3 Dennis D Katumbi Me Tanzania Project Mratibu   4 Eva V. Maendaende Ke Nyasa DC Planning Officer   5 Agnes Manufred   Chale Ke  Retired Public Officer      144 | Page   KIIs-Lindi Region (Lindi Mc)   Na. Jina Jinsia Taasisi Kazi Yako   1 Moses Mkoveko Me Lindi Municipal Council Afisa Maendeleo   2 Hadija Mnunduma Ke Kusudio Women   Group   Secretary   3 Lunda Juma Lunda Me Lindi Makuni Diwani   4 Nelson Choaji Me LIWOPAC Ag: Director   5 Juhudi B. Mgallah Me Lindi RS Afisa Mipango Wa Mkoa      KIIs-Lindi Region (Kilwa DC)   Na. Jina Jinsia Taasisi Kazi Yako   1 Cosmas Liveta Me Anglican Church Reverend   2 Juma J. Hamadi Me Kilwa District Council Dplo   3 Juma Ally Kumpita Me  Biashara   4 Theodora Beda Mkundi Ke Tusiwaki Advocacy   5 Jafari B. Arobaini Me Kilwa - Kivinje District Councilor      KIIs-Mtwara Region (Mikindani MC)   Na. Jina Jinsia Taasisi Kazi Yako   1 Juma Napinda Me TCCIA REO   2 Shadida A. Ndile Ke Mtwara Municipal   Council Mayor   3 Gwakisa J.   Mwasyeba Me Mtwara Municipal   Council Economist   4 Abdi Mfinanga Me RS- Mtwara Assistant Ras- Planning And   Coordination   5 Jacqueline Mpunjo Ke Sports Development Aid Mratibu      KIIs-Mtwara Region (Tandahimba Dc)   Na. Jina Jinsia Taasisi Kazi Yako   1 Aidan B. Chipande Me Tandahimba District   Council Councillor   2 Karim M. Mputa Me Tandahimba District   Council DPLO   3 Faudhi J. Madalaja Me Rotoso - Tandahimba Afisa Miradi   4 Bakari Salama Nahaya Me BAKWATA Mwenyekiti   5 Kassim Swalehe Lihumbo Me  Retired Officer/   Mkulima      FGDs-Ruvuma Region (Songea Mc)   Na. Jina Jinsia Taasisi Kazi Yako   1 Hussein H Mkwepo Me     2 Stephano Daniel   Ntani Me Roman Catholic Katekista   3 Issa Hamza   Zawamba Me M/Kiti Mtaa Mwenyekiti/Mkulima   4 Issa Issa Nyoni Me  Mkulima Na Mfugaji   5 Amir K Chowo Me Skill Pass Islamic Mwalimu   145 | Page   Na. Jina Jinsia Taasisi Kazi Yako   School   6 Happiness O Komba Ke  Fundi Kushona   7 Wilbert Mahundi Me  Diwani   8 Ziada Mkinga Ke  Mjasiliamali   9 Philipina A Tarimo Ke  Mkulima   10 Salum S Masamaki Me Machinga Mwenyekiti   11 Zuberi Haji Haule Me UWASSESO Mwenyekiti   12 Mathew Ndumba Me ROA Mkurugenzi      FGDs-Ruvuma Region (Nyasa Dc)   Na. Jina Jinsia Taasisi Kazi Yako   1 Amos Francis Ndunguru Me Watu Wenye   Ulemavu Mjumbe   2 Yohanes Exsaver Mava Me  Mkulima Na Mwenyekiti   3 Hassan Hemedi Lizomba Me  Imamu   4 Ambrose Raphael Machasa Me  Youth   5 Fokas Abel Mbunda Me  Mkulima   6 Dickson Adrian Nyoni Me  Youth Representative   7 Hairamu Rupia Malugu Me  Youth Representative   8 Amani Kasimba Me  Ngo Representative   9 Esau Mwasumbi Me  Mfufaji   10 Yazindi Milinga Me  Mjumbe   11 Martin Mponda Me  Mvuvi   12 Sylvester Kalimbe Me  Youth Representative   13 Grace Malipa Ke  Women Representative   14 Veronica Odo Ke  Entrepreneur   15 Zuberi A. Issa Me  Entrepreneur   Representative   16 Anembe L. Mhidze Ke  Women Representative   17 Prisca A. Mpangala Ke  Youth Representative      FGDs-Lindi Region (Lindi MC)   Na. Jina Jinsia Taasisi Kazi Yako   1 Ali Hassani Me  Mfugaji   2 Musa D. Chengula Me CSO Mjasiriamali   3 Jamali S. Mpili Me Private Sector Katibu   4 Asha Hamisi Ke Migombani Fishing Mweka Hazina   5 Hamisi Ally Mchonjo Me Migombani Fishing Mjumbe   6 Chigogolo Mohamed Me Cpct - Lindi Pastor   7 Seif Mohamud Nyirani Me  Mkulima   8 Paulina Chacha Ke  Mjasiriamali   9 Pascol Kalimwa Me CDO Mjumbe   10 Saidi Hamisi Kawanga Me   Rondo Womens   Development   Organisation   (ROWODO)   Mhasibu   11 Mohamedi A Chimbuli Me Lindi MC Afisa Msitu/ Mstaafu   12 Alusaria Mushi Ke Kikundi Jipe Moyo Lindi Mjasiriamali   146 | Page   Na. Jina Jinsia Taasisi Kazi Yako   13 Nasri Rashidi Me Lindi Mc Afisa Biashara      FGDs-Lindi Region (Kilwa Dc)   Na. Jina Jinsia Taasisi Kazi Yako   1 Shante Wakati Me  Mvuvi   2 Ally Nampange Me  Mvuvi   3 Yusufu Ulete Me  Mkulima   4 Maulidi Hamisi Me Bodaboda Dereva   5 Saidi Pakia Me Bodaboda Mwenyekiti   6 Maulidi Chumba Me Bodaboda Dereva   7 Selemani Mohamed Me  Mfanyabiashara   8 Hamisi Tipitipi Me  Mkulima   9 Mohamed Yusuphu Me Bodaboda Dereva   10 Zahara Juma Ke  Mkulima   11 Judith B. Chikawe Ke  Mfugaji Na Mkulima   12 Alli M. Mngumba Me  Mfanyabiashara   13 Alafa Muamedi Ke  Mjasiriamali   14 Bimkubwa Selemani Ke  Mkulima   15 Zawadi Kalist Ke TCRS Afisa Miradi      FGDs-Mtwara Region (Mikindani Mc)   Na. Jina Jinsia Taasisi Kazi Yako   1 Matokea S. Chande Ke Machinga Katibu   2 Ramadhani Hassan Mtumba Me Machinga Mwenyekiti   3 Rshid Zahir Me Mtwangonet Accountant   4 Hidaya H. Ally Ke  Mjasiriamali   5 Fanikio Chijinga Me CCM Mwanasiasa   6 Fatuma M. Mpondomoka Ke Jukwaa La Wanawake Mwenyekiti   7 Saimon E. Elias Me Mtwara Mc Afisa Mifugo   8 Reniuce J. Mhakama Me Mtwara Mc Mhandisi Kilimo   9 Jacqueline Mpunjo Ke Sports Development   Aid (SDA) Mratibu   10 Lilian Mhangaza Ke Shemo Mkurugenzi   11 Joshua A. Songa Me  Mjasiriamali   12 Rev. Dausi A. Nalima Me KKKT Mchungaji   13 Edither A. Nandonde Ke Vikundi Vya   Wanawake   Mwenyekiti/   Mfanyabiashara   14 Rhoda K. Ngonga Ke Mtwara MC Afisa Uvuvi   15 Hassan B. Mpwago Me Bakwata Imamu   16 Halima Juma Ke Jukwaa La Uchumi Mwenyekiti (W)   17 Francis P. Chiwango Me MEROD Mkurugenzi   18 Mwasyeba Gwakua Ke Mtwara MC Mchumi   19 Zuhura B. Mikidadi Ke Mtwara MC Diwani   20 John D. Mitwe Me Tasa (NGO) Mkurugenzi      147 | Page   FGDs-Mtwara Region (Tandahimba Dc)   Na. Jina Jinsia Taasisi Kazi Yako   1 Idrisa Silimu Me Kikundi _Tuamke Fundi Selemala   2 Tekla Milanzi Adriano Ke Cdo- Tandahimba Afisa Maendeleo Ya   Jamii   3 Hashimu J. Sudi Me Rotoso (NGO) Mkurugenzi   4 Bakari Salama Nahayo Me Bakwata Mwenyekiti   5 Nurdin S. Mkusa Me Kikundi – Tupendane Katibu   6 Hawa J. Chihungo Ke Kikukndi – Twendesawa Katibu   7 Ulaya R. Mmule Me Ulenje Transport Katibu   8 Lukas E. Mlaponi Me Kanisa – Katoliki Katekista   9 Hamisi A. Linyembe Me  Mkulima   10 Saidi M. Mtora Me CCM Katibu   11 Likwati Mustafa Me Machinga Mwenyekiti   12 Muhaji H. Mpondomo Me Machinga Katibu   13 Bosco Gauprid Namangaya Me Tanzania Delicious   Cashews Limited Executive Director   14 Irene G Luoga Ke Halmashauri Afisa Vijana      Zonal Workshop Southern Zone (Mtwara)   Na. Jina Jinsia Taasisi Kazi Yako   1 Sunday S. Hebuka Me RS-Ruvuma Mratibu NGOs   2 Joseph Mohono Ngocho Me Private Sector – Ruvuma Mfanyabiashara   3 Thadeus Musembi Me UNICEF Consultant   4 Scola A. Mwalyanzi Ke RS- Lindi Mratibu Dira RS Lindi   5 Dennis Urio Me TRA- Mtwara Afisa Kodi   6 Noel Chinowa Me CPCT Mchungaji   7 Nelson Choaji Me LIWAPOC- Lindi Mratibu Mashirika   8 Fidea Ruanda Ke Ngo Mtwangonet Mratibu   9 Liberatus Maganya Me Tccia – Lindi Mwenyekiti   10 Dikson Mwagwai Me NMB Afisa Mahusiano   11 Osmunda Kapinga Ke RS Mtwara Ag. AAS - V&B   12 Hasan S. Mtenga Me Bunge Mbunge   13 Baltazar B. Komba Me FAWOPA E/Director   14 Zamla R. Dongwala Me SIDO Rm (Ag)   15 Eng. Milson Kiboma Me TANESCO Ag. RM   16 Henry Shimo Me TCCIA/ Chibeshi Biashara   17 Meriki S. Kinuno Me PCCB Mtwara Afisa Uchunguzi   18 Sixmund J. Lungu Me Mtwara MC Naibu Meya/ Diwani   19 Acp Mtaki N. Kurwijila Me Polisi Ag. Rpc – Mtwara   20 Dickson M. Abdueri Me Vodacom Ag. Manager   21 Frank Omollo Me Mtwara RS Katibu Wa Afya   22 Olivia George Mushi Ke Mtwara RS Katibu Mipango   23 Mustafa Kwiyunga Me MRENGO Mratibu Ngos   24 Richard Mbambe Me Mahakama Kuu Kanda   Mtwara Mtendaji Wa Kanda   25 Abdillah Mfinanga Me RS Mtwara Aas. P&C   26 Lucy Kiteve Ke RS Mtwara Economist   148 | Page   Na. Jina Jinsia Taasisi Kazi Yako   27 Patrick B. Kyaruzi Me RS Mtwara REO   28 Dadi Ngaharo Me RS Mtwara RAO   FGDs-Kagera Region (Bukoba Mc)      FGDs-Kagera Region (Muleba Dc)      FGDs -Mara Region (Musoma Mc)   No. Name Institution Position   1 Boniphace Daudi Nyakumu Farmer Farmer   2 Issa Shaban Magwa Bodaboda Bodaboda Rider   3 Charles M Waitara Shiuma Machinga   4 Daniel Mkolera Shiuma Machinga   5 Seleman. M. Rajab Business Business Person   6 Samweli Twaibu Livestock Livestock Keeper   7 Elisha Simeo Fisheries Fisherman   8 Maiga K Charles St. Justin Centre Teacher   9 Emanuel Kapande St. Justin Centre Journalist   10 Mwanulah Ukwaju Entrepreneurship Entrepreneur   11 Bakari Juma Bakwata Muleba District Secretary   Na Name Institution Position   1 Husna Mohamed Abdallah (Shiuma) Machinga Mama Lishe, Farmer   2 Rosemary Stanshau   Nyamtamisa (Machinga) Mama Lishe Mama Lishe   3 Juma Mussa Sharifu Bodaboda Chairperson Kagera Region   4 Martin Alex Fisheries (Fishing Activities) Secretary   5 Mch. Elisha Bililiza Anglican Pastor   6 Sweetbert Mushnga Shivyawata(M) Secretary   7 Tawafiq S. Salum Government Diwani   8 J0sephat Kyamuhangile Farmer Farmer   9 Dr. Mugisha Rweyemamu ESRF Researcher   10 Apolinary Tamayamah ESRF Researcher   11 Flora Myamba ESRF Researcher   12 Erasto.M Kawanji RS-Kagera Statistician   13 Hobokela Kawanji  Bukoba MC Economist   Na Jina Taasisi Kazi Yako   1 Rugaimukamu M. Rwebembela Retired Officer Retired Officer   2 Fr. Donatian Ruga Nyamtamisa Rc. Bukoba Diocese Planing   3 Jovitha Juston Tawfa Fishing   4 Sinani B. Swaibu Bakwata And Shiuma Entrepreneur’s Secretary   5 Bryson N. Majambo Business Chairperson   6 Jastine Jasson Humuliza MEO   7 Alisia Asiel Humuliza ESLO   8 Clinton Johnstone Tuinuane Carpenter   9 Alson Oscar Mulokozi Tuinuane Carpenter   10 Emilu Kamsini Fisheries (Fishing) Secretary   11 Derosela Mulisa Muleba MC Planning Officer   12   Jumamosi E. Esore   Self Employed   Garden Keeper   149 | Page   150 | Page   FGDs-Mwanza Region (Mwanza Cc)   No. Jina Institution Position   1 Sospeter Peter CSO Member   2 Daniel Ngoye Angrobelg Member   3 Diana Pius Sai Farming Member   4 Beate M. Kiroin MCC Transport Manager   5 Ramadhani J. Omary UVCCM District Secretary   6 Melckzedeki Munguri Shiwawata Nyamagana District Secretary   7 Sara Daniel Caiyak Group Officer   8 Amani Mahuba Peace Committee Sheikh   9 Re. Julius M. Kisandu Peace Committee Bishop   10 Adela Peter Entrepreneur Chairperson   11 Mohamed Dauda Machinga Chairperson      Zonal Workshop-Lake Zone (Mwanza)   No. Jina Institution Position   1 Edina M. Malegesi Kahama Municipal Planning Officer   2 Marcelina Msafiri Manengo RS Simiyu Planning Officer   3 Deus. M.Paschal RS Shinyanga Economist   4 Magreth Kadwela Kivulini Organziation  Planning Officer   5 Bhoke Leo Wote Sawa Legal Officer   6 Revocatus Joseph Mycn Program Offices   7 Holela Mabuka CCK Farmer   8 Benson R Badhweka Lvbwb Engineer   9 Godson P Kweka Ethics Secretarial Zonal Leader   10 Hamis Mussa Bakwata Ustadhi   11 Rev.Robert Bundalo Cpt Bishop   12 Rev.Boniface Mulinga A Worker Bishop   13 Twaha Bakari Bakwata Sheikh   14 Alice A Mwasyoge DIT HR   15 Eng. Magesa Mwita Tanroad Head Planning   16 Amon B Michael Tanesco SMO   17 Bonaventura P Ndekeja NlD Managing Secretary   18 Mariam Benjamini Taa Mwanza Airport Manager   19 Mussa M Mcholla NBC Relationship    Mabager   20 Thomas Ujaji NBC Manager   21 Alexandra J.   Reuben Crdb-Mwanza Banker   22 Angella A Kiwia Dpco Dpco   23 Alphonce Mokoki Tadb Zonal Manager   24a Aggrey Muhabuku Tda Ag. Manager   25 Last M Lingson Geita Rs Plo Den   26 Kitoga Lawrence Emedo Plon Officer   27 Mangola S Bahati Amani Girls Home Project Officer   28. Dr. Mugisha Rweyemamu Esrf Researcher   29. Dr. Flora Myamba Esrf Researcher   30. Mr. Apolinary Tamayamali Esrf Researcher   151 | Page   FGDs-Mwanza Region (Sengerema DC)   No. Name Institution Position   1 Nestory.J. N. Estory Kijana Wajibu Carpenter   2 Mussa W. Mpogomi Livestock Livestock Keeper   3 Morris G. Ndicho Processing Processor   4 Bernardetha Karoli Foundation For Better   Future   CEO   5 Maneno Lukubanta Farming Farmer   6 Frank T. Magafu Mineral Commissioner Mineral Argent   7 Machumu K.Mgurusi Pwd Farmer   8 Sudi Mashaka Ramadhani Transport Sector   Representative      9 Rajabu Said Bakwata Spiritual Leader   10 Allyriu Seneda Fisheries Fishermen   11 Sunzu Hamis Shiuma Machinga   12 Dawne Matonange Women Agriculture/ Business      FGDs-Mara Region (Tarime TC)   Na Jina Taasisi Kazi Yako   1 Mzumbe Hamisi Entrepreneurship Entrepreneur   2 Janeth Jacob Robhi Entrepreneurship Chairperson   3 Peter Chacha Mnanka Farming Farmer   4 Boniphace Kisiri Ubere Tuwakomboe Para Legal   Organisation Paralegal   5 Stephen Chacha Tccia Tarime Chairperson   6 Samweli Nyamhanga Mwita Pwd Chawata Secretary   7 Francis Makuri Church Pastor      KIIs - Lake Zone Regions   Na Region/Council Jina Taasisi   1 Kagera     2 Bukoba Mc Hobokela Kawanji Ag Municipal Economist   3  Shabani Rashid Said, , Counselor   4  Dr. Yusto Paradius Muchuruza Executive Director Of Kadetfu (NGO)   5  Yunus Kabwemela Supreme Perch Limited Project Manager   (Industry).   6 Muleba Dc Evart S. Kagaruki District Planning Officer   7  Sheik Aziz Isihaka Yusufu Bakwata-Muleba District Sheikh   8  Muhaji Yusuph Bushako Vice Council Chairman, Muleba District   Council   9  Rugaimukamu Mukandala   Rwebembele A Retired Teacher   10  Nordin Amani Monitoring And Evaluation Officer- Uashemi,   NGO   11 Mara     12 Musoma Mc Emmanuel P. Mazengo AAS-Planninga And Coordinattion   13  Samuel Warioba Municipal Economist   152 | Page   Na Region/Council Jina Taasisi   14  William Patrick Gumbo Hon. Mayor Musoma Mc   15  Ms Lydia Ayoub Ag Project Manager, Rafiki Social   Development Organisation-Sdo   16  Boniphace Ndengo Chairperson Of TCCIA Mara Region   17 Tarime Dc Viktor F.Magafu District Planning Officer-Dplo   18  Mr Jonathan M. Machango Retired Divisional Secretary   19  Sheikh Masoud Said BAKWATA-District Sheikh   20  Emmanuel Zabron Buchafwe Tarime Development Organization   21  Michael Chacha Kembaki Member of Parliament   22 Mwanza     23 Mwanza Cc Susan Martin Ndunguru Ag AAS-Planning And Coordination   24  Edward Mwamotela City Economist   25  Hassani Karambi TCCIA-Secretary   26  Ramadhani Omary    27  Mr. David Georges. Representative From Farmer/Processing   Industry   28 Sengeremadc Mr. Sita Boniphas District Planning Officer   29  Amary Twaibu Athuman CCM District Party Secretary   30  Bethold Byoma   Executive Director-Tanzania Association For   People Living In Difficult Environment   (TAPODE)   31  Mr Amary Twaibu Athuman District CCM Party Secretary   32  Mr Christopher Kiula Retired Officer Dalfo      KIIs-Pwani Region (Mkuranga DC)   Na. Jina Taasisi Kazi Yako   1 Sospeter J. Missiani  Farmer   2 Grace N. Mwaiwaga Mkuranga DC Planning Officer   3 Adam Kitungulu Ngunda KKKT Preacher   4 Prisca M. Ngwesheni CSO Director   5 Rajabu Mmunda Mkuranga DC District Industry, Trade   and Investment Officer   6 Abdul S. Lugombe BAWAMIN Secretary   7 Nzingula M. Zacharia TCCIA Executive      KIIs-Pwani Region (Kibaha TC)   Na. Jina Taasisi Kazi Yako   1 Msangi Kibaha Afisa Biashara   2 George Semwaiko Kibaha    3 Mohamed Alli Solovea Msikitini Ustadhi   4 Wambura Maro Yamo Kibaha Town Council Planning Officer   5 George Gervas Mhode Tumbi Ward Kibaha Chairperson      153 | Page   FGDs -Pwani Region (Mkuranga DC)   Na. Jina Jinsia Taasisi Kazi Yako   1 Sospeter J. Missiani Me  Farmer   2 Hassani Kambangwa Me Disabled People Farmer   3 Adam Kitungulu Ngunda Me KKKT Preacher   4 Prisca M Ngwesheni Ke CSO Director   5 Mabula Samwel Mabula Me Entrepreneurs Group Chairperson   6 Abdul S. Lugome Me Bawamin Secretary   7 Nzingula M. Zacharia Me TCCIA Executive    8 Faustine J Onyango Ke Mapambano Centre   For Children Coordinator   9 Msumche A Ngamnoni Me  Livestock Keeper   10 Haji B. Mwandwi Me Boda Boda Driver   11 Evelyn Henry Magoma Ke Kikundi Cha Wajane M/Kiti Na Mjasiliamali   12 Julias Kibatega Me  Farmer   13 Christopha J Chalo Me Mkuranga DC Security Guard   14 Hidaya Juma Jongo Ke Mkuranga Dc Cleaning Staff   15 Furahia Iddi Ke Shebila Entrepreneur   16 Hadija Habdala Ke  Entrepreneur   17 Said J Said Me Kikundi Cha Vijana Representative   18 Mohammed A Mahimbwa Me  Entrepreneur   19 Eliah G Kigelulye Me  Farmer   20 Pariti Kamungu Me  Livestock Keeper      KIIs- Rukwa and Songwe Regions   S/N District Name Organisation/Institution   1 Mbozi Halima Mbita RAS – Heed-Planning And   Coordination   2 Mbozi John Tobongo Save The Children;   3 Mbozi Rabson Mwaipula Ccm. Regional Elders’   Chairperson/Entrepreneur   4 Mbozi Asante Amos I Ndimbo Retired Officer   5 Mbozi Pantaleo Mkangara    6 Tunduma Farida Kassim Mbonde DED - Ag. Hod Planning And   Coordination   7 Tunduma John Mgwasi Mbwatila Retired (Tazara) And Farmer   8 Tunduma Rev. Ezekiel   Mwandulogulile ELCT Tunduma   9 Tunduma Daudi Msukwa CSO LRDO   10 Tunduma Ezekia Watson Secretary CCM   11 Sumbawanga Mashaka Mwanjali RAS Office - Ag HoD   12 Sumbawanga Anthony Kayombo DED Sumbawanga: Ward Councilor   13 Sumbawanga Oscar Abraham   Machimu Retired Officer   14 Sumbawanga Frank Mateni Head Community Development   15 Sumbawanga Joel Chalanda Political Leader   16 Kalambo Benard Mwakalinga DED Kalambo: Ag HoD Planning and   Coordination   17 Kalambo Servi N. Josaphart Kalambo - DAS   154 | Page   18 Kalambo Edmond Laban   Sichelima Retired Officer   19 Kalambo Edison Kibonde   Mwakyusa Businessman   20 Kalambo John Mtumizi Muyamba Political Leader      FGDs-(Mbozi Dc and Tunduma TC)   S/N Name Institution Position   1 Laurance Josephat Tunduma Livestock Keeper   2 Daudi Msukwa Irdo Field Officer   3 Getrude Kaseya Tunduma Welfare   4 John Mwatila Tunduma Farmer   5 Innocent Urassa Tunduma Livestock Keeper   6 Charles Sikanyika Tunduma Travel Agent   7 Happy Nyema Tunduma Travel Agent   8 Faraja Sanga Tunduma Business   9 Halima J Karanji Tunduma Food Vendor   10 Joyce Kayuni Mbozi Trader   11 Rose Maguiwe Mbozi Trader   12 Martin Tiwizi Mbozi Livestock Keeper   13 Michel Mwaipisi Mbozi Livestock Keeper   14 Feruzi Omari Mbozi Shekhe   15 Enea Mwanja Mbozi Chair Uvccm   16 Juliana Gerald Mbozi Food Vendor   17 Jeremia Sanyangwa Mbozi Retired public servant   18 Pendo Nzunda Mbozi Food Vendor   19 Lydia Sigayanga Mbozi Food Vendor   20 Salome Mgumba Mbozi Farmer   21 Elia Bukuku Mbozi Priest   22 Simon Sipweke Mbozi Farmer   23 Josephine   Mwanswmbo Mbozi Farmer      FGDs - Sumbawanga Mc and Kalambo DC   Sn Name Institution Position   1 Eva Dawson Sumbawanga Mc Entrepreneur   2 Linda Bilagi Sumbawanga Mc Mineral Commission   3 Thomas Sepe Sumbawanga Mc Pwd Representative   4 Elisha Kabenga Sumbawanga Mc Street Vendor   5 Daniel Apoho Sumbawanga Mc Livestock Keeper   6 Fredrick Nchinga Sumbawanga Mc Street Vendor   7 Filbert Massawe Sumbawanga Mc Chicken Farmer   8 Musa Daudi Sumbawanga Mc Fish Farmer   9 Sara Ngumbi Sumbawanga Mc Legal NGO   10 Lucy Mfupe Sumbawanga Mc Lwano   155 | Page   Sn Name Institution Position   11 Dr. Jaclkline   Nung’ombe Sumbawanga Mc CSO   12 Edson Chalamila Sumbawanga Mc Pastor   13 Tina Mwesemba Sumbawanga Mc Agent   14 Kule Kajeta Sumbawanga Mc Agent   15 Hapiness Mwesa Sumbawanga Mc Farmer   16 Emmanuel Malekana Kalambo Dc Livestock Keeper   17 Francisco Benezeti Kalambo Dc Farmer   18 Samwel Sebe Kalambo Dc CSO   19 James Sieme Kalambo Dc Farmer   20 Lufingo Malifimbo Kalambo Dc Farmer   21 Ezekiel Ndenje Kalambo Dc Katekista   22 Leokadia Ntine Kalambo Dc Food Vendor   23 Suleiman Akyallo Kalambo Dc Bakwata   24 Mwendo Mwaluswaswa Kalambo Dc Chair Bodaboda   25 Thomas Chole Kalambo Dc Youth Representative   26 Alistrid Kapele Kalambo Dc Livestock Keeper   27 Galus Kijumba Kalambo Dc    28 Issa Nasibu Kalambo Dc Fisherman   29 Emmanuel Mwakalinga Kalambo Dc Street Vendor   30 Emmanuel   Simbaulanga Kalambo Dc Education Officer      KIIs- Singida Region   Region Council Respondent Name Sex Institution & Title/ Occupation   Singida Singida Mc Mr. Romward Daniel   Mwendi   M AAS- Pc: Singida Rs (Rs   HoD)   Mr. Selestine Massawe M Municipal Economist    Muttabazi Anselmi   Adrian   M District Party Chairman -   Chadema   Adela Sabas Minja F Petty Trader (Business   Owner)   Peter John Lissu M DFPA, Research and   Development Organization   (NGO)   Manyoni Dc Edgar Madje M DPCO- Manyoni (LGA-HoD)   Maimuna Likunguni F District Party Secretary-   CCM   Rev. Peter Manase M Priest Canon- Anglican   Church TZ   Hamisi Jumanne Lissu M Retired Public Servant –   Manyoni DC   Yonaha Makabali   Chalinze   M M&E Officer -Manyoni   Paralegal Center –MAPAC   (CSO)   156 | Page   KIIs-Dodoma Region   Region Council Respondent Name Sex Institution & Title/   Occupation   Dodoma Dodoma   Cc   Charles Ali Mduma M Aas- Pc: Dodoma Rs (Rs   HoD)   Francis Nathan Kaunda M City Economist (LGA-HoD)   Alistid Tesha M Retail Shops (Businesses   Owner)   Israel Mwansasu M CC Councilor, Retired Civil   Servant   Rev. Taxon Makson Mwakyambo M Parish Priest- Anglican   Church TZ   Bahi Dc Said Faustin Magembe M Planning Officer (LGA-HoD)   Arbogast Omziba Chrisant M Retiree, Former Vet Officer   Victor Leonard Chulubii M Business person (Business   Owner)   Augostino Leonard Ndonu M DC Councilor, Council   Chairman   Rev. Emmanuel Chimuli   Chibwana   M Pastor, And District   Chairman For CPCT   Leaders In Bahi DC.      FGDs-Singida Region (Singida MC)   Region Council Participant’s Name Sex Institution & Title/ Occupation   Singida Singida   Mc   Dyness Abraham Mollel F Mjasiriamali   Baraka Hussein Mwamba M Mjasiriamali   Ezekiel Sidael Goroi M Mfanyabiashara   Hadija Juma Nkumbi F Fundi Ushonaji   Deo Gabriel Mathowo M YMC- Singida   Said Kitila Rashid M Mjasiriamali   Hadija A. Msumari F Mkulima   Juma I. Mkhofoi M Mfugaji Samaki   Abasi E. Mwanjisi M Mwanafunzi Wa Chuo   Romana Samuel Augustino F Mwanafunzi Wa Chuo      FGDs-Singida Region (Manyoni DC)   Region Council Participant Name Sex Institution & Title/ Occupation   Singida Manyoni   Dc   Hamis Msabaha Ali M Manyoni Paralegal Center   Tasbu Mashaka Issa M Mkulima   Oswaldi Pantaleo Mark M M/Kiti Wa Machinga   Henry Beno Mallya M Makam M/Kiti-Machinga   Joseph Missanga M Mkulima Na Biashara   Zakayo Ijojo M Mfugaji Kuku   Christina Joseph Kasmiri F Mkulima/Karanga   Khadija A. Kamashani F Mama Lishe   Judith Robert Mpambe F Mjasiriamali Mdogo   Ferdinandi Peter Madeje M Mjasiriamali Mdogo   Franco D. Mwinjili M Mjasiliamali-Kijana   Ostatila Muilaki F Kijama   157 | Page   FGDs-Dodoma Region (Dodoma CC)   Region Council Participant Name Sex Institution & Title/ Occupation   Dodoma Dodoma   Cc   Said R. Kabende M Ceo- Ifova (People with   Disabilities)   Rev. Petro Lebarai M Kkkt Central Diocese of Dodoma   Lulu Aron Molel F Charity Vision Tanzania (NGO)   Peter M. Mallya M Dodoma City Council   Essau D. Tandilla M Action For Community Care (NGO)   Ally J. Kanda M Amir -Jai Org (FBO)   Dr. Hamoud J. Ndege M Cmsr-Tanzania   Cryes Pius M Mimi Ni Taa – (CSO)   Ellen Eliakim Luhende F Dodoma Universities   Representative (Youths)   Moses Julius M Economist –Dodoma Cc Intern   (Youths)   Ray Peter Mark M The Young World Feeders –   Entrepreneur   Josephine K. Josiah F Sweet Uji Dodoma (Entrepreneur)   Justus Ng’wantalima M Shivyawata (M) Dodoma (Special   Group)      FGDs-Dodoma Region (Bahi DC)   Region Council Participant Name Sex Institution & Title/ Occupation   Dodoma      Mohamed A. Mngoya M Chairman- Bahi Boda Boda   Group   Amina Mohamed F Mama Lishe Mgahawa   (Entreprenour)   Meliki Zedeki M Mjasiliamali (Mwakilishi Wa   Walemavu- Pwds)   Ramadhani Issa Utengule M Chairman –Skimu Ya Matajila   (Farmers)   Mariam Shaban F M/Jamii – Intern Bahi DC   (Youths)   Andrea E. Malecela M Mjasiriamali (Biashara Ndogo   Ndogo)   Miraji Bakari Sogani M Chariman –Wafugaji Bs (CSO)   Janeth Mkumbo F Mkulima   Said F. Maghembe M Afisa Mipango   Blezi Simon Nkutupa M Mfugani      Zonal Workshop-Central Zone (Dodoma)   Na. Participant Name Sex Institution & Title/ Occupation   1 Mlonda K. Damas M Dodoma Cc   2 Dr. Calorine C. Luhembe F St. Johns’ University   3 Valerian Suwal F Dodoma- RS   4 Alfred Mayiku M Dodoma- RS   5 Paul T. Ngusa M Kijana- Dodoma   6 Dennis Qenyares M TANESCO   7 Theresia Philemon F Lecturer -UDOM   8 Geofrey M. Nawazura M Retired Officer   9 Erick Ojah Omera M Mjasiriamali   158 | Page   Na. Participant Name Sex Institution & Title/ Occupation   10 Magreth Otieno F RC’s Office-Dodoma   11 Prisca Mhando F W/ Kilimo   12 Christian Msumari F Machinga-Dodoma   13 Rahiya Nasser F Kondoa DC   14 Anastazia Charles F Mamalishe- Dodoma   15 Rev. Elikana Gonda M CCT -Dodoma   16 Masimami Javau M CCM - Hq   17 Samson Msilu M LGTI- Hombolo   18 Mpangwa Daniel M Dodoma CC   19 Franu Jordan M Times FM -Majira   20 Hemed Bojo M Boda Boda -Dodoma   21 Judith Fue Tumbao F Wazee- Dodoma   22 Yohana Muussa M Act-Wazalendo   23 Chifu -Jackson G. Topa M M/Kiti Mkoa -Dodoma   24 Fr. Raphael Maligite M RC Church (TEC)   25 Jopham I. Hilme M Nangomba Security   26 Mwantumu Abdul Mohamed F Mwajo H Cleaning   27 David George Mzuli M Wazee –Ccm Mkoa   28 Philp P. Mahende M Raso- Dodoma   29 Deus Polepole M Ahafo- Dodoma (NGO)   30 Luhaga C. Makunja M Ngonedo Dodoma (NGO)   31 Bernad Abraham M Dodoma -RS   32 Juma Sadick Bulwa M Bajaji/Boda -Dodoma   33 Salum S. Dhamin M Kongwa DC   34 Stanley Lameck M Mowt (Transport)   35 Charles Alias Kamkungumi M Ben Mkapa Hospital   36 Timothy Holela M CBO   37 Askofu Joseph S. Mutorela M CCT-Mkoa (CBO)   38 Bogiti Samhende M Dodoma – RS PC   39 Jordan Matonya M M/Finance (MoFP)   40 Sabas Damian Chambasi M Dodoma –Rs (Elimu)      FGDs Participants-Zanzibar (Wete DC)   Sn Name Gender Institution Occupation   1 Sada Juma Segeja Female Community Forests Pemba Community Officer   2 Makame Hamad Said Male Self Employed Mkulima   3 Omar Ali Salim Male Action Aid Tanzania Programme Officer   4 Ali Jabir Khamis Male   Pemba Investment And Youth   Development Organization   (Piydo)   Youth Officer   5 Sheha Abdalla Juma Male Pemba Channel Conservation   Area (Pecca)   Marine Conservation   Officer   6 Ali Yakoub Suleiman Male Self Employed Mfugaji   7 Ali Abdalla Mohd Male Self Employed Mfugaji   8 Seif Haji Hamad Male Self Employed Msafirishaji   9 Said Hamad Ali Male Self Employed Mkulima   10 Gaspary Charles Male Tanzania Media Women's   Association Mratibu   11 Fatma Nassor Omari Female Kifumbika Tushi    12 Sharif Makame Tani Male Jumaza Mwalimu Wa   Madrassa   13 Asha Suleiman Haji Female B.L.V    14 Mtumwa Said Juma Female Wete Dc Mratibu Ww   159 | Page   Sn Name Gender Institution Occupation   15 Eva Robert Stansley Female Self Employed Mpambaji (Harusi)   16 Hassan Hamis Hassan Male Kinyikani       KIIs Participants-Zanzibar (Wete Dc)   Sn Name Gender Institution Occupation   1 Ismail Ali Juma Male North Pemba RCO Regional Planning Officer   2 Semani Songoro   Mussa Female Wete DC’s Office Afisa Utumishi   3 Said Hamis Nkindwa Male Ccm Katibu Wa Wazazi,   Kaskazini Pemba   4 Salim Awadh Omar Male Self Employed Food Stuff Trader   5 Omar Ali Salim Male Action Aid Tanzania Program Officer      FGDs Participants-Zanzibar (Micheweni DC)   Sn Name Gender Institution Occupation   1 Bakari Abdallah   Shaam Male Self Employed Mwalimu Wa Madrassa   2 Abdalla Khamis   Shaame Male Ccm Mwenezi Wilaya   3 Bimkubwa Khamis   Juma Female Self Employed Mchoraji (Heena)   4 Salama Abdalla   Mchande Female Self Employed Mfanya Biashara   (Chakula)   5 Asha Hamad Mbwara Female CCM Mjumbe Wa Sheha   6 Makarani Juma Abra Male Self Employed Mkulima Wa Mboga   7 Ali Khamis Abouda Male Mungu Atosha Mchakataji   8 Omar Hamad Salim Male Vikundi NGO's Mwanasiasa   9 Nasra Khamis Faki Female Self Employed Mchoraji   10 Ali Hamad Juma Male A/M/W Micheweni Mratibu   11 Khamis Hamad Omar Male Self Employed Mfanya Biashara (Nguo)   12 Sheha Omar Sheha Male Self Employed Mwalimu   13 Mohd Rashid Said Male Self Employed Fundi Ujenzi   14 Chande Faki Male Self Employed Uvuvi   15 Haji Abdalla Hassan Male Self Employed Mjasiriamali   16 Yasini Jabu Hamis Male Baraza La Vijana Mtumishi Wa Umma   17 Maryam Omar Ali Female Mstaafu Mstaafu      KIIs Participants-Zanzibar (Micheweni DC)   Sn Name Gender Institution Occupation   1 Sofia Mohammed   Mziray   Female National Electoral   Commission   Member of Nec National   2 Abdulrahman Ally Nuhu Male Micheweni DC’s Office Mhasibu Msaidizi   3 Mariam Omar Ally Female Retired Mwenyekiti Wa CCM,   Micheweni   4 Abdalla Khamis   Shaame   Male Ccm Mwenezi   5. Omar Kombo Haji Male Micheweni DC’s Office Afisa Utumishi      FGDs Participants-Zanzibar (West A DC)   Sn Name Gender Institution Occupation   1 Ali Haji Haji Male Zanab Wwu - Mjasiriamali   2 Yumna Ali Mwinjuma Female West A Dc Afisa Wa Wwu   3 Abdulrazak Sheha Male Vijana Wilaya   4 Ali Khamis Haji Male Self Employed Mkulima   5 Suleiman Kimara Male Hawaii Fundi Seremala   6 Abuu Abdallah Male Self Employed Driver   7 Mwadini Haji Jongo Male Maisha Gem Mfanya Biashara   8 Mufida Bakar Khamis Female Vijana Wilaya   9 Abdulla Ali Abdulla Male Vijana Wilaya   10 Salama Kassisi Talib Male West A Dc Afisa Ustawi   11 Rehema Shehe Male Self Employed Mjasiriamali   12 Ahmada Z. Nassor Male Self Employed Mfugaji   13 Rehema A. Makame Female W/Magharibi Mratibu   14 Mauwa Hassan Yahya Female Self Employed Mama Lishe   15 Akama Ali Mzee Female K/W Wilaya Mkulima   16 Khamis Bai Khamis Male District Fisheries Office Afisa Uvuvi   17 Zainab M. Othman Female Kianga Mwanaharakati      KIIs Participants-Zanzibar (West A DC)   Sn Name Gender Institution Occupation   1 Shadidaomarali Female Tanzania Human Rights   Defenders Coalition Program Manager   2 Omar Abdisalamuali Male West A DC’s Office Planning Officer   3 Rehemakhamis Ali Female West A DC’s Office Retired   4 Hamdun   Hemedrashid Male CCM Member Of The Ccm –   Constituency Level   5 Mohammed Kassim Male Wakf Andtrust Commission Sheikh/Imam      FGDs Participants-Zanzibar (Urban DC)   Sn Name Gender Institution Occupation   1 Salmin M. Nahoda Male Zanzibar Youth Council Mwenyekiti Wa Vijana   2 Thania S. Abdalla Female W/Mjini Afisa Msaidizi Mipango   3 Hamid Kassim Male Self Employed Utamaduni   4 Khadija A. Salmin Female Unemployed Mama Wa Nymbani   5 Lailat Omar Ke Self Employed Mjasiriamali (Mboga)   6 Maryam M. Kheir Female Self Employed Mfanya Biashara   7 Zubeir B. Hassan Male Wakfu/Amana Afisa Wakfu Wilaya   8 Sharifa J. Haji Female Self Employed Mjasiriamali   9 Pili Haji Foum Female W/Mjini Afisa Maafa   10 Mwanakhamis M.   Ali Female W/Mjini Afisa Uvuvi      Sn Name Gender Institution Occupation   11 Mithle H. Mussa Female W/Mjini Afisa Ustawi   12 Ali Soudi Ali Male Self Employed Mkulima   13 Salma A. Mahumba Female W/Mjini Afisa Maafa      KIIs Participants-Zanzibar (Urban DC)   S/N Name Gender Institution Occupation Institution   1 Halimaibrahim Female Act   Wazalendo   Administrator ACT Wazalendo Vuga   Offices   2 Dadimaalim Male Rafiki Tours   and Travel   Director Rafiki Tours and Travel -   Shangani Offices   3 Abdallahija Male Zanzibar   Youthforum   (Zyf)   Program   Manager   ZYFOffices, Mlandege   4 Makamesilima Male W/Urban   Rc’soffice   Planning Officer W/Urban Rc’s Office   5 Thaniasuleiman   Abdallah   Female Urban   Dc’soffice   Planningofficer Urban DC’s Office                                                                                                            Economic and Social Research Foundation   51 Uporoto Street (Off Ali Hassan Mwinyi Rd) Ursino Estate   P.O. Box 31226 Dar es Salaam   Tel +255 22 2926083-90, Mobile +255 754 780133   Email: esrf@esrf.or.tz Web: www.esrf.or.tz 